An advertising trade group that gave an award to Cambridge Analytica last year for its “big data” work during the 2016 presidential election is now urging marketers to reconsider the ethics of how consumer information is collected and used.The trade group, the Advertising Research Foundation, said it was waiting for more information before formally rescinding the award given to Cambridge Analytica, the British political consulting firm that was recently reported to have improperly harvested the data of 50 million Facebook users. The revelations have brought intense criticism of Facebook, which is facing inquiries from lawmakers on both sides of the Atlantic around how it handles user information, and have many people taking a closer look at the role of data in online advertising."We’ve tended to assume that because you can do something, you should,” Scott McDonald, chief executive of the ad group, said in an interview on Tuesday. He added that advertisers had been more concerned with the accuracy and validity of data they received from technology companies than with asking whether they should be collecting that data and using it to target consumers in the first place.Mr. McDonald addressed the Cambridge Analytica situation and the need for new guidelines during a speech on Wednesday morning at the group’s annual convention in New York.Things were much different last year, when Cambridge Analytica won a gold prize at the foundation’s David Ogilvy Awards, which have been given annually since 1994. The firm was honored for its work for the Trump campaign, in which it identified and advertised to undecided voters.The selection, made by a jury of ad industry leaders, was “very controversial because of the nature of the campaign,” Mr. McDonald said. But the ad group viewed itself as “Switzerland,” he said, and was simply conducting “a scientific evaluation of the quality of work.”“Nobody had any idea the data might have been pilfered,” he said. Mr. McDonald said he planned to potentially poll the jury again and “see if the accusations are sustained” before officially stripping Cambridge Analytica of the award.The existence of the award highlights the enthusiasm with which marketers have approached the reams of consumer data generated by digital devices and their belief that people are happy to share whatever information technology may be collecting from them.The Advertising Research Foundation, which acknowledged that the United States may adopt new regulations on how consumer data is collected, said it planned to work with other industry groups to form new guidelines for collecting and protecting that information. Mr. McDonald said advertising had gone too far in viewing consumers as prey, noting that even the industry’s vocabulary had become militarylike.“We talk about ad campaigns, consumers we target. We talk about subway takeovers, pop-ups,” he said. “These are fairly aggressive, and I don’t think we even think about it — they’re just embedded in the metaphors of advertising.”Cambridge Analytica, the political data firm with ties to President Trump’s 2016 campaign, suspended its chief executive, Alexander Nix, on Tuesday, amid the furor over the access it gained to private information on more than 50 million Facebook users.The decision came after a television broadcast in which Mr. Nix was recorded suggesting that the company had used seduction and bribery to entrap politicians and influence foreign elections.The suspension represented a new low point for the fortunes of Cambridge Analytica and for Mr. Nix, who spent much of the past year making bold claims about the role his outfit played in the election of Mr. Trump. The company, founded by Stephen K. Bannon and Robert Mercer, a wealthy Republican donor who has put at least $15 million into it, offered tools that it claimed could identify the personalities of American voters and influence their behavior.So-called psychographic modeling techniques, which were built in part with the data harvested from Facebook, underpinned Cambridge Analytica’s work for the Trump campaign in 2016. Mr. Nix once called the practice “our secret sauce,” though some have questioned its effectiveness.But in recent days, the firm has found itself under increased scrutiny from lawmakers, regulators and prosecutors in the United States and Britain following reports in The New York Times and The Observer of London that the firm had harvested the Facebook data, and that it still had a copy of the information.The reports quickly put Mr. Nix in the cross hairs of a parliamentary committee investigating fake news and Russian interference in Britain’s referendum to exit the European Union. Earlier this month, he told the committee that Cambridge Analytica had never obtained or used Facebook data — a statement that the firm itself has contradicted in recent days.But it was Monday’s broadcast by Channel 4 News in Britain that appeared to push the board of Cambridge Analytica to move against Mr. Nix. Channel 4 spent months investigating the company, and sent a reporter to pose as a prospective client from Sri Lanka, secretly filming the encounters with Mr. Nix.The most damning footage was captured in January when Mr. Nix, sitting in a hotel bar in London, suggested the firm could send an attractive woman to seduce a rival candidate and secretly videotape the encounter, or send someone posing as a wealthy land developer to pass a bribe.“We have a long history of working behind the scenes,” Mr. Nix said.Inside Cambridge Analytica, Mr. Nix, the scion of a wealthy family who attended Eton College, the exclusive secondary school, had a reputation for lashing out at staff members, and for aggressively pursuing deals.Christopher Wylie, a data expert who worked at the firm in 2013 and 2014 and helped develop its voter-profiling technology, said in a recent interview that he kept memberships at a number of exclusive strip clubs near Pall Mall in London at the insistence of Mr. Nix, who often entertained clients from African and Caribbean countries there.“Why would I have these memberships?” said Mr. Wylie, who is gay. “I didn’t want them.”Channel 4 followed up Tuesday with a second part of its investigation that focused mainly on Mr. Nix’s claims that Cambridge Analytica played a pivotal role in the election of Mr. Trump — a claim that many inside the Trump campaign have disputed.The Channel 4 report also included allegations first reported by The Times this past weekend that Cambridge Analytica’s use of foreigners to work on election campaigns in the United States could have violated American election laws. (The Times did not work with Channel 4.)Announcing its chief executive’s suspension, Cambridge Analytica said in a statement that “in the view of the board, Mr. Nix’s recent comments secretly recorded by Channel 4 and other allegations do not represent the values or operations of the firm and his suspension reflects the seriousness with which we view this violation.”The company said it had asked Alexander Tayler, its chief data officer, to serve as its acting chief executive. Mr. Tayler trained as a chemical engineer and joined Cambridge Analytica in 2014 as its lead data scientist, according to his LinkedIn profile.At the same time, the company said it was initiating an “independent investigation” of Mr. Nix’s comments and the allegations facing the firm.The company said it had hired a lawyer, Julian Malins, “to lead this investigation, the findings of which the board will share publicly in due course.”It added: “The board will be monitoring the situation closely, working closely with Dr. Tayler, to ensure that Cambridge Analytica, in all of its operations, represents the firm’s values and delivers the highest-quality service to its clients.”It was not immediately clear what impact Mr. Nix’s resignation would have on the SCL Group, the parent company of Cambridge Analytica. The companies were set up with a convoluted corporate structure, and their operations are deeply intertwined.Mr. Nix, for instance, holds dual appointments at the two companies. Cambridge Analytica is registered in Delaware and almost wholly owned by the Mercer family, but it is effectively a shell — it holds intellectual property rights to its psychographic modeling tools, yet its clients are served by the staff at London-based SCL and overseen by Mr. Nix, who is a British citizen.Neither the Mercer family nor Mr. Bannon has publicly commented since the reports in the Times and The Observer.Facebook, too, has sought to avoid the spotlight but also found itself under a similarly unwelcome glare. In the United States, the Federal Trade Commission said on Tuesday that it had opened an investigation into whether Facebook violated an agreement with the agency on data privacy.In addition, Eric T. Schneiderman, the attorney general of New York, said the state was joining Massachusetts in an investigation into whether the company failed to protect the privacy of users in those states. Their attorneys general have demanded that Facebook hand over information about its interactions with Cambridge Analytica.“Consumers have a right to know how their information is used — and companies like Facebook have a fundamental responsibility to protect their users’ personal information,” Mr. Schneiderman said.In Britain, Damian Collins, the chairman of the Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee of the House of Commons, which is running the inquiry into fake news, called on Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, to give evidence to Parliament.In a letter, Mr. Collins said that previous answers from Facebook officials about the misuse of data had been “misleading.”“It is now time to hear from a senior Facebook executive with the sufficient authority to give an accurate account of this catastrophic failure of process,” the letter said, adding, “I hope that this representative will be you.”Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the previous night’s highlights that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. If you’re interested in hearing from The Times regularly about great TV, sign up for our Watching newsletter and get recommendations straight to your inbox.Cambridge Analytica, the Trump-linked data firm, is in hot water after a hidden camera captured Alexander Nix, its chief executive, suggesting ways to entrap political rivals through bribery and seduction. Stephen Colbert was happy to see it.The New York Times reported over the weekend that Cambridge Analytica had gained access to the private information of over 50 million Facebook users, none of whom had been notified.Trevor Noah responded to reports that President Trump may be thinking of firing the special counsel Robert Mueller.Vladimir Putin, a favorite heel of all the late-night humorists, won re-election as Russia’s president on Sunday. With the recent poisoning of a former Russian spy fresh in their minds, the hosts cried foul.Burt Reynolds gave an, ahem, revealing interview about a great moment in American history.Whose cellphone are we snooping on? RuPaul’s, Jenny Slate’s or Kumail Nanjiani’s?John Oliver, the host of HBO’s “Last Week Tonight,” sits down with Seth Meyers on Tuesday. They’re likely to discuss anxieties about the Russia investigation.In a searing new standup show, the comic Hannah Gadsby targets Louis C.K., Harvey Weinstein and Bill Clinton, as well as “the culture that enables and excuses abuse.” Our comedy critic calls Gadsby a major new talent.British investigators on Friday night searched the London offices of Cambridge Analytica, the data-analytics company that harvested data from 50 million Facebook users to develop psychological profiles on behalf of political campaigns, including that of President Trump.About 20 investigators from Britain’s data watchdog, the Information Commissioner’s Office, descended on the company’s offices on New Oxford Street after obtaining a search warrant from the High Court.“We are pleased with the decision of the judge, and the warrant is now being executed,” the office of the information commissioner, Elizabeth Denham, said in a statement. “This is just one part of a larger investigation into the use of personal data and analytics for political purposes. As you will expect, we will now need to collect, assess and consider the evidence before coming to any conclusions.”Last Saturday, the same day The New York Times and The Observer of London published a detailed look at the company’s use of Facebook data, Ms. Denham’s office announced an investigation into “the circumstances in which Facebook data may have been illegally acquired and used.”The office said the inquiry would “consider how political parties and campaigns, data analytics companies and social media platforms in the U.K. are using and analyzing people’s personal information to micro target voters.”The police search carried out on Friday night had been expected. The revelations about the company’s data use have set off a storm on both sides of the Atlantic.European and American lawmakers have demanded an explanation of how the British consulting firm gained access to the Facebook data in 2014, and why Facebook failed to inform its users. The company’s stock has taken a hit, and some consumers have stopped using Facebook.The company’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, said on Wednesday that his company mishandled data and promised to do better.The Information Commissioner’s Office has described its investigation as “complex and far-reaching” and said that it would pursue criminal or civil enforcement vigorously.Our report that a political firm hired by the Trump campaign acquired access to private data on millions of Facebook users has sparked new questions about how the social media giant protects user information.Cambridge Analytica, a political data firm hired by President Trump’s 2016 election campaign, gained access to private information on more than 50 million Facebook users. The firm offered tools that could identify the personalities of American voters and influence their behavior.Cambridge has been largely funded by Robert Mercer, the wealthy Republican donor, and Stephen K. Bannon, a former adviser to the president who became an early board member and gave the firm its name. It has pitched its services to potential clients ranging from Mastercard and the New York Yankees to the Joint Chiefs of Staff.On Monday, a British TV news report cast it in a harsher light, showing video of Cambridge Analytica executives offering to entrap politicians. A day later, as a furor grew, the company suspended its chief executive, Alexander Nix.The data, a portion of which was viewed by The New York Times, included details on users’ identities, friend networks and “likes.” The idea was to map personality traits based on what people had liked on Facebook, and then use that information to target audiences with digital ads.Researchers in 2014 asked users to take a personality survey and download an app, which scraped some private information from their profiles and those of their friends, activity that Facebook permitted at the time and has since banned.The technique had been developed at Cambridge University’s Psychometrics Center. The center declined to work with Cambridge Analytica, but Aleksandr Kogan, a Russian-American psychology professor at the university, was willing.Dr. Kogan built his own app and in June 2014 began harvesting data for Cambridge Analytica.He ultimately provided over 50 million raw profiles to the firm, said Christopher Wylie, a data expert who oversaw Cambridge Analytica’s data harvesting. Only about 270,000 users — those who participated in the survey — had consented to having their data harvested, though they were all told that it was being used for academic use.Facebook said no passwords or “sensitive pieces of information” had been taken, though information about a user’s location was available to Cambridge.Facebook in recent days has insisted that what Cambridge did was  not a data breach, because it routinely allows researchers to have access to user data for academic purposes — and users consent to this access when they create a Facebook account.But Facebook prohibits this kind of data to be sold or transferred “to any ad network, data broker or other advertising or monetization-related service.” It says that was exactly what Dr. Kogan did, in providing the information to a political consulting firm.Dr. Kogan declined to provide The Times with details of what had happened, citing nondisclosure agreements with Facebook and Cambridge Analytica.Cambridge Analytica officials, after denying that they had obtained or used Facebook data, changed their story last week. In a statement to The Times, the company acknowledged that it had acquired the data, though it blamed Dr. Kogan for violating Facebook’s rules and said it had deleted the information as soon as it learned of the problem two years ago.But the data, or at least copies, may still exist. The Times was recently able to view a set of raw data from the profiles Cambridge Analytica obtained.The company issued a statement on Friday saying that in 2015, when it learned that Dr. Kogan’s research had been turned over to Cambridge Analytica, violating its terms of service, it removed Dr. Kogan’s app from the site. It said it had demanded and received certification that the data had been destroyed.Facebook also said: “Several days ago, we received reports that, contrary to the certifications we were given, not all data was deleted. We are moving aggressively to determine the accuracy of these claims. If true, this is another unacceptable violation of trust and the commitments they made. We are suspending SCL/Cambridge Analytica, Wylie and Kogan from Facebook, pending further information.”In a further step, Facebook said Monday that it had hired a digital forensics firm “to determine the accuracy of the claims that the Facebook data in question still exists.” It said that Cambridge Analytica had agreed to the review and that Dr. Kogan had given a verbal commitment, while Mr. Wylie “thus far has declined.”Facebook, already facing deep questions over the use of its platform by those seeking to spread Russian propaganda and fake news, is facing a renewed backlash after the news about Cambridge Analytica. Investors have not been pleased, sending shares of the company down more than 8 percent since Friday.■The Federal Trade Commission said Tuesday it is investigating whether Facebook violated a 2011 consent agreement to keep users’ data private.■ In Congress, Senators Amy Klobuchar, a Democrat from Minnesota, and John Kennedy, a Republican from Louisiana, have asked to hold a hearing on Facebook’s links to Cambridge Analytica. Republican leaders of the Senate Commerce Committee, led by John Thune of South Dakota, wrote a letter on Monday to Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, demanding answers to questions about how the data was collected.■ A British Parliament committee sent a letter to Mr. Zuckerberg asking him to appear before the panel to answer questions on Facebook’s ties to Cambridge Analytica.■ The attorney general of Massachusetts, Maura Healey, announced on Saturday that her office was opening an investigation. “Massachusetts residents deserve answers immediately from Facebook and Cambridge Analytica,” she said in a Twitter post. Facebook’s lack of disclosure on the harvesting of data could violate privacy laws in Britain and several states.NAIROBI — A data analytics firm at the center of a controversy over its  acquisition and use of personal Facebook data in the 2016 United States presidential election is under new scrutiny for its role in Kenya’s presidential election last year.Senior officials of Cambridge Analytica, whose parent company is the SCL Group, said in an undercover video by Channel 4 News of Britain that the company played a critical role in President Uhuru Kenyatta’s two campaigns, in 2013 and 2017.The revelations come only weeks after Mr. Kenyatta and his chief rival, Raila Odinga, reconciled after months of contention.In the video, Mark Turnbull, a Cambridge Analytica executive, said the company twice rebranded Mr. Kenyatta’s political party, wrote his campaign speeches and his political platform, and twice conducted surveys of 50,000 people to ascertain Kenyan voters’ hope and fears.A spokesman for Mr. Kenyatta referred inquiries to his party, the Jubilee Party, whose top official did not respond to messages seeking comment on Tuesday night.Mr. Kenyatta won re-election last October after two presidential votes. The first, in August, was nullified by the Supreme Court, which cited widespread irregularities and ordered a second election. Mr. Odinga pulled out of the second vote, which was held in October, saying the process was unfair.The acrimonious political season included divisive speech by both parties, observers said, and continued well past Mr. Kenyatta’s inauguration. The two archrivals shook hands and reconciled  this month.Moses Karanja, a researcher on a project at Strathmore Law School in Nairobi about social media and misinformation during the presidential election, said the recent reports about Cambridge Analytica’s role in Kenya, and its abuse of Facebook data globally, reinforced concerns raised in his own work about how Kenyans’ personal data was accessed by political parties and even by government institutions, like the elections commission.He said targeted text messages that he and others received during the campaign season suggested that individuals’ voter registration information, social media data and telephone numbers were being independently linked — although it’s still unclear how.“We don’t know how they accessed this data, or how it all ended up being linked to phone numbers and such,” Mr. Karanja said. “For me that’s scary. Those are questions those platforms should answer.”Gacheke Gachihi, who leads the Mathare Social Justice Center in Nairobi, said Cambridge Analytica’s branding for Mr. Kenyatta was “divisive propaganda,” raising ethnic enmity.“The way you paint your opponent, you paint also his supporters,” he said, “and you and your ethnic base will feel like, ‘This man is a devil.’ That undermines the work we are trying to do for social justice.”Local news media had reported last spring that Mr. Kenyatta’s party had retained Cambridge Analytica for his re-election campaign. And David Murathe, the vice chairman of the Jubilee Party, told Reuters on Tuesday that SCL helped the campaign with branding last year.Mr. Odinga’s party also enlisted a data-driven political consulting firm, but its on-the-ground team was deported from Kenya just a week before the election, according to The Los Angeles Times.On its website, Cambridge Analytica names Kenya as one of its political case studies, describing a 47,000-person survey it conducted in 2013 to identify Kenyan voters “real needs (jobs)” and “fears (tribal violence),” as well as their “preferred information channels.”The company also said it targeted youth voters with a social media campaign.Cambridge Analytica’s parent group, SCL, described similar activities on an archived page of its website, and said it also advised on communications, branding and strategy during the electoral period.Cambridge said its survey was “the largest political research project ever conducted in East Africa.” Mr. Turnbull told Channel 4’s undercover reporter that it repeated the survey in 2017.Those survey results, Mr. Karanja said, could reverberate beyond social media campaigns and “be translated into non-Internet platforms like radio, television advertisements and billboards.”He said his research team documented several examples of misinformation spreading on WhatsApp and other social media and filtering down to local talk radio shows or newspaper articles.WASHINGTON — Sitting in a hotel bar, Alexander Nix, who runs the political data firm Cambridge Analytica, had a few ideas for a prospective client looking for help in a foreign election. The firm could send an attractive woman to seduce a rival candidate and secretly videotape the encounter, Mr. Nix said, or send someone posing as a wealthy land developer to pass a bribe.“We have a long history of working behind the scenes,” Mr. Nix said.The prospective client, though, was actually a reporter from Channel 4 News in Britain, and the encounter was secretly filmed as part of a monthslong investigation into Cambridge Analytica, the data firm with ties to President Trump’s 2016 campaign.The results of Channel 4’s work were broadcast in Britain on Monday, days after reports in The New York Times and The Observer of London that the firm had harvested the data from more than 50 million Facebook profiles in its bid to develop techniques for predicting the behavior of individual American voters.The weekend’s reports about the data misuse have prompted calls from lawmakers in Britain and the United States for renewed scrutiny of Facebook, and at least two American state prosecutors have said they are looking into the misuse of data by Cambridge Analytica.Now, the Channel 4 broadcast appears likely to cast an even harsher spotlight on the company, which was founded by Stephen K. Bannon and Robert Mercer, a wealthy Republican donor who has put at least $15 million into Cambridge Analytica.The firm’s so-called psychographic modeling techniques, which were built in part with the data harvested from Facebook, underpinned its work for the Trump campaign in 2016, though many have questioned their effectiveness.Less noticed has been the work that Cambridge Analytica and its parent company, the SCL Group, have done outside the United States. The operations of the two companies were set up with a convoluted corporate structure and are deeply intertwined.Mr. Nix, for instance, holds dual appointments at the two companies. Cambridge Analytica is registered in Delaware and almost wholly owned by the Mercer family, but it is effectively a shell — it holds intellectual property rights to its so-called psychographic modeling tools, yet its clients are served by the staff at London-based SCL and overseen by Mr. Nix, who is a British citizen.SCL Elections has clients around the world, and it has experimented with data-driven microtargeting techniques in the Caribbean and Africa, where privacy rules are lax or nonexistent and politicians employing SCL have been happy to provide government-held data, according to former employees.[ALSO READ: How Cambridge Analytica Harvested Facebook Data, Triggering a New Outcry]But in the footage broadcast by Channel 4, Mr. Nix offered services that go far beyond data harvesting. The Times did not work with Channel 4 on its report about Cambridge Analytica.“Many of our clients don’t want to be seen to be working with a foreign company,” he told the Channel 4 reporter, who was not identified. “We can set up fake IDs and websites, we can be students doing research projects attached to a university, we can be tourists. There’s so many options we can look at.”The Channel 4 reporter posed as a “fixer” for a wealthy Sri Lankan family that wanted to help politicians they favored. In a series of meetings at London hotels between November and January, all of which were secretly filmed, Mr. Nix and other executives boasted that Cambridge Analytica employs front companies and former spies on behalf of political clients.The information that is uncovered through such clandestine work is then put “into the bloodstream to the internet,” said Mark Turnbull, another Cambridge executive, in an encounter in December 2017 at the Berkeley hotel in London.“Then watch it grow, give it a little push every now and again, over time, to watch it take shape,” he added. “It has to happen without anyone thinking, ‘That’s propaganda.’ Because the moment you think ‘that’s propaganda,’ the next question is, ‘Who’s put that out?’”The most damning footage, though, was of Mr. Nix’s suggestion that the company could entrap political rivals through seduction or bribery.At a meeting in January, also at the Berkeley hotel, Mr. Nix was direct about the techniques SCL could use to aid a client.“I mean, deep digging is interesting,” he said. “But you know equally effective can be just to go and speak to the incumbents and to offer them a deal that’s too good to be true, and make sure that that’s video-recorded, you know. These sorts of tactics are very effective, instantly having video evidence of corruption, putting it on the internet, these sorts of things.”Mr. Nix then suggested they could have someone pose as a wealthy developer. “They will offer a large amount of money to the candidate, to finance his campaign in exchange for land for instance,” he said. “We’ll have the whole thing recorded on cameras.”Or, Mr. Nix said, they could “send some girls around to the candidate’s house — we have lots of history of things.”The reporter asked what kind of girls, and Mr. Nix said they could find some Ukrainian women. “I’m just saying, we could bring some Ukrainians in on holiday with us you know,” Mr. Nix replied. “You know what I’m saying.”“They are very beautiful,” he said. “I find that works very well.”To be sure, though, Mr. Nix said that he was speaking only in hypotheticals. “Please don’t pay too much attention to what I’m saying because I’m just giving you examples of what can be done and what, what has been done,” he said.Cambridge Analytica, in a statement issued after the Channel 4 broadcast, said the report was “edited and scripted to grossly misrepresent the nature of those conversations and how the company conducts its business.”The company said that it was the undercover reporter who had raised the idea of entrapping politicians, and that the executives had been trying to assess his intent. Mr. Nix and Mr. Turnbull “humored these questions and actively encouraged the prospective client to disclose his intentions,” it said.“They left with grave concerns and did not meet with him again,” the company said.For Mr. Nix, the footage comes at an already perilous moment. Earlier this month, he told a parliamentary inquiry into fake news and Russian interference in Britain’s referendum to exit the European Union that Cambridge Analytica never used or possessed Facebook data.But following the reports in The Times and Observer on Saturday, Damian Collins, the Conservative lawmaker leading the inquiry, said he planned to call Mr. Nix back to testify.“It seems clear that he has deliberately misled the committee and Parliament,” Mr. Collins said in a statement this weekend.Elizabeth Denham, the British information commissioner, told Channel 4 News that on March 7 she asked for access to Cambridge Analytica, setting a deadline of 6 p.m. Monday. Ms. Denham said she did not accept the response as satisfactory and so would be applying in court on Tuesday for a warrant.“We need to look at the databases, we need to look at the servers and understand how the data was processed,” she said.In a statement, Facebook said that it had “hired a digital forensics firm, Stroz Friedberg, to conduct a comprehensive audit of Cambridge Analytica.”But Mr. Collins, who is chairman of the House of Commons digital, culture, media and sport committee, said he was concerned that Facebook might gain access to data before the information commissioner did.“What are they doing?” Mr. Collins asked on Channel 4 News. “Are they going in to physically recover data, to disturb the files? This investigation should be for the authorities.”Mr. Collins said that the former Cambridge Analytica employee who came forward to disclose his company’s actions, Christopher Wylie, would be giving evidence to his committee. He said he wanted Mark Zuckerberg, or another senior executive from Facebook, to do the same.SAO PAULO —  Federal prosecutors in Latin America's biggest country announced Thursday that they are investigating to determine if Cambridge Analytica illegally used the profiles of millions of Brazilian Facebook users.Prosecutors the investigation was prompted by reports that the London-based political consulting firm had access to the personal information of 50 million Facebook users in the United States and could create voter personality profiles.They said in a statement they want to find out if Cambridge Analytica, in partnership with local consultancy A Ponte Estrategia Planejamento e Pesquisa, also did the same thing in Brazil before the country's October elections.Prosecutors said the partnership between both consulting firms began in 2017.The Brazilian company said in a statement that it was never involved in the creation of such profiles and ended its relationship with Cambridge Analytica earlier this month."We are investigating if Cambridge Analytica is illegally using the personal data of millions of Brazilians to construct psychographic profiles to determine political and religious beliefs, sexual orientation, skin color, and political behavior," the prosecutors' statement said. "It is clear that the company's focus is to use this data to change people's behavior."According to Statista, a Hamburg, Germany-based data and statistical company, Brazil has the world's third largest number of Facebook users as of January 2018. With 130 million Facebook users, Brazil comes behind India with 250 million and the United States with 230 million.Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg has said his company has a responsibility to stop fake news that could affect elections."There's a big election in India this year, there's a big election in Brazil, there are big elections around the world, and you can bet that we are really committed to doing everything that we need to make sure that the integrity of those elections on Facebook is secured," he said in a Wednesday interview with CNN.Fake news, including stories posted on Facebook, and their potential to interfere in the coming elections is a growing concern in Brazil.As a start-up called Cambridge Analytica sought to harvest the Facebook data of tens of millions of Americans in summer 2014, the company received help from at least one employee at Palantir Technologies, a top Silicon Valley contractor to American spy agencies and the Pentagon.It was a Palantir employee in London, working closely with the data scientists building Cambridge’s psychological profiling technology, who suggested the scientists create their own app — a mobile-phone-based personality quiz — to gain access to Facebook users’ friend networks, according to documents obtained by The New York Times.Cambridge ultimately took a similar approach. By early summer, the company found a university researcher to harvest data using a personality questionnaire and Facebook app. The researcher scraped private data from over 50 million Facebook users — and Cambridge Analytica went into business selling so-called psychometric profiles of American voters, setting itself on a collision course with regulators and lawmakers in the United States and Britain.[Read more about the Cambridge Analytica whistle-blower contending that data-mining swung the Brexit referendum.]The revelations pulled Palantir — co-founded by the wealthy libertarian Peter Thiel — into the furor surrounding Cambridge, which improperly obtained Facebook data to build analytical tools it deployed on behalf of Donald J. Trump and other Republican candidates in 2016. Mr. Thiel, a supporter of President Trump, serves on the board at Facebook.“There were senior Palantir employees that were also working on the Facebook data,” said Christopher Wylie, a data expert and Cambridge Analytica co-founder, in testimony before British lawmakers on Tuesday.Cambridge Analytica has found itself confronting a deepening crisis since reports about the firm’s data harvesting were published this month in The New York Times, The Observer of London and The Guardian.The connections between Palantir and Cambridge Analytica were thrust into the spotlight by Mr. Wylie’s testimony on Tuesday. Both companies are linked to tech-driven billionaires who backed Mr. Trump’s campaign: Cambridge is chiefly owned by Robert Mercer, the computer scientist and hedge fund magnate, while Palantir was co-founded in 2003 by Mr. Thiel, who was an initial investor in Facebook.The Palantir employee, Alfredas Chmieliauskas, works on business development for the company, according to his LinkedIn page. In an initial statement, Palantir said it had “never had a relationship with Cambridge Analytica, nor have we ever worked on any Cambridge Analytica data.” Later on Tuesday, Palantir revised its account, saying that Mr. Chmieliauskas was not acting on the company’s behalf when he advised Mr. Wylie on the Facebook data.“We learned today that an employee, in 2013-2014, engaged in an entirely personal capacity with people associated with Cambridge Analytica,” the company said. “We are looking into this and will take the appropriate action.”The company said it was continuing to investigate but knew of no other employees who took part in the effort. Mr. Wylie told lawmakers that multiple Palantir employees played a role.Documents and interviews indicate that starting in 2013, Mr. Chmieliauskas began corresponding with Mr. Wylie and a colleague from his Gmail account. At the time, Mr. Wylie and the colleague worked for the British defense and intelligence contractor SCL Group, which formed Cambridge Analytica with Mr. Mercer the next year. The three shared Google documents to brainstorm ideas about using big data to create sophisticated behavioral profiles, a product code-named “Big Daddy.”A former intern at SCL — Sophie Schmidt, the daughter of Eric Schmidt, then Google’s executive chairman — urged the company to link up with Palantir, according to Mr. Wylie’s testimony and a June 2013 email viewed by The Times.“Ever come across Palantir. Amusingly Eric Schmidt’s daughter was an intern with us and is trying to push us towards them?” one SCL employee wrote to a colleague in the email.Ms. Schmidt did not respond to requests for comment, nor did a spokesman for Cambridge Analytica.In early 2013, Alexander Nix, an SCL director who became chief executive of Cambridge Analytica, and a Palantir executive discussed working together on election campaigns.A Palantir spokeswoman acknowledged that the companies had briefly considered working together but said that Palantir declined a partnership, in part because executives there wanted to steer clear of election work. Emails reviewed by The Times indicate that Mr. Nix and Mr. Chmieliauskas sought to revive talks about a formal partnership through early 2014, but Palantir executives again declined.In his testimony, Mr. Wylie acknowledged that Palantir and Cambridge Analytica never signed a contract or entered into a formal business relationship. But he said some Palantir employees helped engineer Cambridge’s psychographic models.“There were Palantir staff who would come into the office and work on the data,” Mr. Wylie told lawmakers. “And we would go and meet with Palantir staff at Palantir.” He did not provide an exact number for the employees or identify them.Palantir employees were impressed with Cambridge’s backing from Mr. Mercer, one of the world’s richest men, according to messages viewed by The Times. And Cambridge Analytica viewed Palantir’s Silicon Valley ties as a valuable resource for launching and expanding its own business.In an interview this month with The Times, Mr. Wylie said that Palantir employees were eager to learn more about using Facebook data and psychographics. Those discussions continued through spring 2014, according to Mr. Wylie.Mr. Wylie said that he and Mr. Nix visited Palantir’s London office on Soho Square. One side was set up like a high-security office, Mr. Wylie said, with separate rooms that could be entered only with particular codes. The other side, he said, was like a tech start-up — “weird inspirational quotes and stuff on the wall and free beer, and there’s a Ping-Pong table.”Mr. Chmieliauskas continued to communicate with Mr. Wylie’s team in 2014, as the Cambridge employees were locked in protracted negotiations with a researcher at Cambridge University, Michal Kosinski, to obtain Facebook data through an app Mr. Kosinski had built. The data was crucial to efficiently scale up Cambridge’s psychometrics products so they could be used in elections and for corporate clients.“I had left field idea,” Mr. Chmieliauskas wrote in May 2014. “What about replicating the work of the cambridge prof as a mobile app that connects to facebook?” Reproducing the app, Mr. Chmieliauskas wrote, “could be a valuable leverage negotiating with the guy.”Those negotiations failed. But Mr. Wylie struck gold with another Cambridge researcher, the Russian-American psychologist Aleksandr Kogan, who built his own personality quiz app for Facebook. Over subsequent months, Dr. Kogan’s work helped Cambridge develop psychological profiles of millions of American voters.
