ABUJA —  Nigeria's former president Goodluck Jonathan was "not aware" of any attempts by political consultancy Cambridge Analytica to interfere in elections in 2007 and 2015, his spokesman said on Thursday.The UK-based political consultancy is facing allegations that it improperly accessed data from social media website Facebook to target voters prior to the U.S. presidential election and Britain's Brexit referendum in 2016.In Nigeria, a government committee is looking into claims that SCL Elections, a Cambridge Analytica affiliate, organized rallies to dissuade opposition supporters from voting against Jonathan's then-ruling People's Democratic Party (PDP) in 2007."Goodluck Jonathan was not aware of such attempts, if there were any," said the ex-leader's spokesman Ikechukwu Eze in a statement."The whistleblower who originated the allegation has been consistent in associating it to an unnamed businessman, who was neither linked to the party nor to the Jonathan campaign," Eze said.The government investigation announced on Monday will also look into whether Cambridge Analytica's work for the election campaigns of the PDP broke Nigerian law "or infringed on the rights of other parties and their candidates".PDP candidate Umaru Yar'Adua won the 2007 presidential ballot. He died in office in 2010 and was succeeded by his deputy, Goodluck Jonathan.Unlike in Europe and the United States, where data-privacy laws provide a level of protection to consumers, many Africans have little or no recourse if a data breach occurs because often legal and regulatory safeguards do not exist.(Reporting by Camillus Eboh; Writing by Paul Carsten; Editing by Andrew Bolton)BOGOTA —  Colombia, which will hold presidential elections in May, on Wednesday blocked access to a cell phone application it said might be connected with Cambridge Analytica, the political consultancy that has been accused of violating Facebook users' privacy to influence elections in Britain and the United States.Lawmakers in the United States and Europe are demanding to know more about Facebook's privacy practices after a whistleblower said Cambridge Analytica improperly accessed data to target U.S. and British voters in close-run elections.Colombia's commerce regulator said in a statement it would block an application called Pig.gi, which gives users free top-ups in exchange for receiving ads and recommending their friends. The app has more than a million downloads in Colombia and Mexico combined, the regulator said.The app, which users download via the Google Play store and sign into using their Facebook account, is administered by Farrow Colombia S.A.S and Farrow Mexico S.A.P.I. de CV, the statement said.Attempts to reach Farrow for comment were unsuccessful. A number listed for Farrow in Colombia belongs to another company. There is no listed number for the Mexico branch of the company."As a preventative measure and taking into account the potential risk of a wrongful and massive illegal use of the personal data of thousands of Colombians collected via the download of the Pig.gi application, the application Pig.gi is temporarily blocked while appropriate investigations are undertaken and definitive decisions adopted," the regulator said.The regulator did not specify what evidence it had of a connection between Cambridge Analytica and Farrow. The application will be blocked on the Google Play app store and on social media, as will websites where it can be downloaded.The regulator added it has requested cooperation and information from its counterparts in the United States, United Kingdom, European Union and Mexico.Facebook announced a series of changes on Wednesday to give users more control over their data, after the scandal wiped more than $100 billion from its stock market value.Cambridge Analytica has said it did not use Facebook data in U.S. President Donald Trump's campaign, and that it had deleted all Facebook data it obtained from a third-party app in 2014 after learning the information did not adhere to data protection rules.Colombia will hold presidential elections on May 27.(Reporting by Julia Symmes Cobb and Nelson Bocanegra; Editing by David Gregorio)BOGOTA —  A cellphone application blocked by the Colombian commerce regulator said on Thursday it has not shared Colombian users' data with Cambridge Analytica, the political consultancy that has been accused of violating Facebook users' privacy to influence elections in Britain and the United States.Colombia, which will hold presidential elections in May, on Wednesday blocked access to the Pig.gi app, which gives users free top-ups in exchange for receiving ads and completing surveys. The app has more than a million downloads in Colombia and Mexico combined.The regulator said the app might be connected to Cambridge Analytica, accused by a whistleblower of improperly accessing data to target U.S. and British voters in recent elections.A representative for the app told Reuters in an email on Thursday that Pig.gi did not have a relationship with the consultancy in the Andean country and that it has not shared any data gained from surveys of Colombian users with Cambridge Analytica.Pig.gi also said it had not yet been informed of the ban by the Colombian regulator."Pig.gi users have the choice to share their opinions consensually in exchange for internet connectivity coins. Their opinions are always anonymized before they are sent in accordance with Colombian and Mexican law," the app said in a statement posted on its Facebook page.The app cut ties with Cambridge Analytica in Mexico after the data scandal broke, saying it had shared results of two election polls of Mexican users with the consultancy and other partners.The commerce regulator said it would comment when its investigation had concluded.Facebook said on Wednesday it would end its partnerships with several large data brokers who help advertisers target people on the social network. The company says the information of about 50 million Facebook users wrongly ended up in the hands of Cambridge Analytica.Cambridge Analytica has denied Facebook data was used to help to build profiles on American voters and build support for Donald Trump in the 2016 U.S. presidential election.(Reporting by Julia Symmes Cobb, editing by G Crosse)BOGOTA —  Colombia, which will hold presidential elections in May, on Wednesday blocked access to a cell phone application it said might be connected with Cambridge Analytica, the political consultancy that has been accused of violating Facebook users' privacy to influence elections in Britain and the United States.Lawmakers in the United States and Europe are demanding to know more about Facebook's privacy practices after a whistleblower said Cambridge Analytica improperly accessed data to target U.S. and British voters in close-run elections.Colombia's commerce regulator said in a statement it would block an application called Pig.gi, which gives users free top-ups in exchange for receiving ads and recommending their friends. The app has more than a million downloads in Colombia and Mexico combined, the regulator said.The app, which users download via the Google Play store and sign into using their Facebook account, is administered by Farrow Colombia S.A.S and Farrow Mexico S.A.P.I. de CV, the statement said.Attempts to reach Farrow for comment were unsuccessful. A number listed for Farrow in Colombia belongs to another company. There is no listed number for the Mexico branch of the company."As a preventative measure and taking into account the potential risk of a wrongful and massive illegal use of the personal data of thousands of Colombians collected via the download of the Pig.gi application, the application Pig.gi is temporarily blocked while appropriate investigations are undertaken and definitive decisions adopted," the regulator said.The regulator did not specify what evidence it had of a connection between Cambridge Analytica and Farrow. The application will be blocked on the Google Play app store and on social media, as will websites where it can be downloaded.The regulator added it has requested cooperation and information from its counterparts in the United States, United Kingdom, European Union and Mexico.Facebook announced a series of changes on Wednesday to give users more control over their data, after the scandal wiped more than $100 billion from its stock market value.Cambridge Analytica has said it did not use Facebook data in U.S. President Donald Trump's campaign, and that it had deleted all Facebook data it obtained from a third-party app in 2014 after learning the information did not adhere to data protection rules.Colombia will hold presidential elections on May 27.(Reporting by Julia Symmes Cobb and Nelson Bocanegra; Editing by David Gregorio) Good Thursday. Here’s what we’re watching:• Jamie Dimon chafes under liquidity rules.• Mark Zuckerberg has disclosed more on how much Facebook user data may have been accessed.• The White House is still talking tough on trade with China.• Blackstone’s infrastructure fund isn’t doing so well.Get this in your inbox each morning. Sign up here.On Wall Street, there’s been a running parlor game about whether Jamie Dimon, JPMorgan Chase’s chief executive, would try to run for president in 2020. His annual letters, filled with commentary on U.S. policy, have only increased the chatter, and this year’s letter, released Thursday, is no different. It touches on everything from trade to immigration. While Mr. Dimon, who once called himself “barely a Democrat,” says he plans to stay at the bank for the next five years, the question among political prognosticators is whether Mr. Dimon’s policy views could ever find a home among voters in this politically polarized environment.Mr. Dimon’s sensible letter was seemingly supportive of some of President Trump’s policies, while taking the opposing side on others. Mr. Dimon particularly applauded the corporate tax cut and deregulation efforts. On China trade, Mr. Dimon writes: “It is not unreasonable for the United States to press ahead for more equivalency,” and that “one of the administration’s best arguments is that negotiation alone has not worked.” However, he said he would like to see more cooperation with U.S. allies on talks with China and added that the U.S. should “revisit the Trans-Pacific Partnership.”On immigration, he called for tougher border control, writing, “American citizens have the right to complain that we have not successfully protected our borders since the last immigration reform in 1986.” He also said, “People immigrating to this country should be taught American history, our language and our principles.” At the same time, he also advocated for “a path to legal status and citizenship” for “Dreamers” and improving “merit-based immigration” programs so that immigrants educated here can stay.Mr. Dimon made a point of saying that part of the problems facing the country is that too many people are talking past each other.“When people argue as if there are binary solutions, the argument is almost always wrong,” he wrote, advocating that people try to look at all sides of a situation. “I tell my liberal friends to read columnists like Arthur Brooks and George Will. And I tell my conservative friends to read writers like Tom Friedman.”If Mr. Dimon were to run, he would likely have to do so as an independent. It is hard to see how liberal Democrats would embrace much of his deregulatory positions. And yet many of his positions – and especially some of his social positions not enunciated in his letter — may not be far right enough to capture the interest of Republicans.Maybe the country needs someone in the middle, but history has not been kind to third-party candidates.— Andrew Ross SorkinJamie Dimon, in his annual letter to JPMorgan Chase’s shareholders, had much to say about political issues like trade and immigration.But he also addressed a policy area much closer to home – bank regulation. Mr. Dimon often has expressed skepticism about aspects of the banking overhaul that took place in the wake of the financial crisis. But his remarks on regulation arguably carry more weight now. Congress is closer to modifying the post-crisis rules than at any point since Dodd-Frank was signed into law in 2010. An important regulatory requirement Mr. Dimon criticized, therefore, might become a focus for those wanting to roll back the rules.Mr. Dimon in this year’s letter zeroed in on regulations that require banks to have a certain amount of liquidity, the financial term for access to cash or low-risk assets that can be easily sold for cash.In 2008, some large financial firms were crippled when customers, depositors and creditors withdrew their money. The Federal Reserve and taxpayers had to step in to support the banks. To help prevent a repeat of this, post-crisis rules require that banks hold a certain amount of liquid assets to cover a theoretical level of outflows. Mr. Dimon is in favor of banks having more liquidity than before the crisis, but in the letter, released Thursday, he wrote:Notably, legislation currently in Congress would tweak liquidity rules. If it passes, bankers may press for more loosening. And, as they have before, bank lobbyists may deploy Mr. Dimon’s main argument here – that regulation can lead to less lending. But there are flaws in this line of attack, especially when it comes to liquidity rules.First, a bank that lacks liquidity is in no position to lend. When a bank’s creditors and customers fear it doesn’t have enough cash in reserve, they will most likely withdraw their money. This not only deprives the bank of the money it needs to lend, it also sharply reduces its chance of survival. Or as Gregg Gelzinis of the left-leaning Center for American Progress puts it, “You won’t be able to take this action if you fail.”Perhaps more importantly, Mr. Dimon leaves out some crucial context. Congress designed the whole post-crisis overhaul to ensure that banks have the funds on hand to lend during a downturn. Dodd-Frank’s architects saw that when banks stop lending, it makes a recession far worse. And that is one reason why banks now have much higher levels of capital. Regulators expect that they will use up some of that capital to keep lending through the economic tumult. This is why the Federal Reserve said after its last bank stress tests:Andrew Gray, a JPMorgan spokesman, followed up with more material on Mr. Dimon’s thinking on liquidity.He re-emphasized Mr. Dimon’s point about having to tie up funds that could be used to make loans. Mr. Gray noted that a bank facing outflows would be expected to keep refilling its pool of liquid assets to be in compliance with a liquidity regulation. This would leave fewer funds for lending and making markets, Mr. Gray asserted.He also addressed the argument that higher capital levels, not liquidity, will largely determine the extent to which banks will lend through a downturn. Mr. Gray asserted that liquidity rules play an important role in ensuring banks have the resources to participate in wider financial markets. Rules forcing the hoarding of liquidity may, thus, crimp that activity.— Peter EavisMick Mulvaney, the acting director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, has complained that the regulator engages in “wasteful spending.” He even submitted a quarterly budget request recently of $0.That attitude apparently didn’t apply to two of his recent hires.Mr. Mulvaney appointed two senior staff members who are paid salaries far above what they had been earning in their previous government jobs in Washington, according to agency documents obtained by The New York Times through a public records request.• Kirsten Sutton was hired in January to be the agency’s chief of staff. Mr. Mulvaney agreed to pay her $259,500 a year. Her salary is the highest allowed under the consumer bureau’s pay scale and represents a raise of more than 50 percent working for one of the C.F.P.B.’s fiercest critics, Representative Jeb Hensarling of Texas, the Republican chairman of the House Financial Services Committee. It is also 22 percent more than her predecessor.• Brian Johnson is another new deputy. In late December, Mr. Mulvaney signed paperwork that awarded Mr. Johnson a salary of $239,595. Mr. Johnson previously worked on the House Financial Services Committee. In his most recent job there, as policy director, he earned about $170,000 a year, according to LegiStorm. Of the 20 people at the bureau with the title of senior adviser, Mr. Johnson is the second-highest paid. (Another adviser, whose name wasn’t disclosed in the public records reviewed by The Times, is paid $240,000.)ContextThe consumer bureau, as well as fellow financial regulators like the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, is allowed under federal law to pay employees significantly more than other government agencies can pay. The rationale is that the higher salaries are necessary to recruit skilled employees who otherwise might land jobs on Wall Street.As a result, the C.F.P.B. is stocked with employees who earn more than the average Washington bureaucrat. Of the agency’s 1,600 employees, 219 make more than $200,000, according to the records reviewed by The Times.— Stacy CowleyBlackRock, the world’s largest money manager, plans to offer a series of new products allowing individuals and institutions to invest in market indexes without putting money into manufacturers and retailers of firearms.They include:• a new exchange-traded fund that will track the performance of the MSCI USA Small Cap Extended ESG Focus Index, composed of small stocks with favorable environmental, social and governance standards, while specifically excluding producers and large retailers of civilian firearms.• a similar credit-focused ETF that eschews the debt of gunmakers and distributors.• an option to take the guns out of institutional strategies tracking major market indexes, including the S&P 500, the Russell 2000 and three others.Critic’s cornerRob Cox of Breakigviews writes:What emerged from Facebook yesterday — in Mark Zuckerberg’s conference call with reporters and in a company blog post — were revelations that users’ public data was more compromised than previously thought.• Facebook said Cambridge Analytica harvested the data of 87 million users, not 50 million.• A vulnerability in search and account recovery functions may have exposed “most” of Facebook’s 2 billion users to unauthorized harvesting of their public profile information.Mr. Zuckerberg, ahead of his testimony to Congress, struck a conciliatory tone. But regulators in Australia, the U.S. and elsewhere are investigating whether the company broke privacy rules.Facebook also outlined steps to prevent misuse of its platform. Among the most significant: restriction of access to so-called A.P.I.s that let developers plug into its network. The Verge’s take: “Effectively, Facebook has put a nail in the coffin of its app platform.”The most immediate effect: Tinder users couldn’t log in.A brighter note for Facebook: Its shares are up in premarket trading today, after Mr. Zuckerberg said that #DeleteFacebook didn’t appear to be having much effect.The Facebook calendar• April 9: Alerts should start popping up for users whose information may have been shared with Cambridge Analytica.• April 10: Mr. Zuckerberg is scheduled to testify before the Senate’s Commerce and Judiciary committees.• April 11: He will testify before the House Energy and Commerce Committee.Elsewhere in tech and regulation: A closer look at Margrethe Vestager, the public face of Europe’s tech clampdown. And the privacy advocate Max Schrems says the fight over user data has just begun.President Trump and the White House insist that the U.S. isn’t in a trade war with China. But it hasn’t backed off from its tariff threats, and the White House press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, said the U.S. may feel “a little bit of short-term pain.”More from behind the scenes, by Ana Swanson and Keith Bradsher of the NYT:Calming the markets has mostly fallen to Larry Kudlow, the White House’s national economic adviser of less than a week.Peter Eavis’s take: We can take lessons on the U.S.-China trade skirmish from Brexit. Looking back, the panicky early reaction to that seems to have sprung more from a fear of the unknown than any big threats to the global trading system.And Greg Ip of the WSJ, who says China started the trade fight, had an informative tweetstorm about each side’s vulnerabilities:But Neil Irwin of the Upshot warns that China has other ways of retaliating.The United States trade deficit rose 1.6 percent to $57.6 billion, its highest level since October 2008. The deficit has now risen for six straight months, the longest such streak since 2000.The merchandise-trade gap with China narrowed to $34.7 billion in February from $35.5 billion. The Trump administration wants to cut $100 billion, or about 25 percent, from the annual deficit with China, Bloomberg points out. During President Trump’s first year in office, the United States’ trade deficit with China rose to $375.2 billion in 2017, a record high.Last May, Blackstone announced with great fanfare that it planned a $40 billion fund with Saudi Arabia to invest in U.S. infrastructure: up to $20 billion from the Saudis, who would match commitments by other outside partners. But as of now, Blackstone has secured just $575 million in such commitments — and missed two fund-raising deadlines.What’s happened, per Kate Kelly and Andrew:• The Saudis wanted the fund overseen by an investment committee, with a seat for them. Blackstone refused.• Many potential investors balked at committing money until an investment team was in place, a process that took some time.In other infrastructure news: D.J. Gribbin, the Trump administration’s infrastructure point person, is leaving the White House, which looks to have delayed its investment plan until after the midterms.• The E.P.A. chief Scott Pruitt, the subject of some unhappy rumblings from the White House, has begun a media pushback against claims about his spending. (Politico)• George Nader, the U.A.E.-connected businessman cooperating with Robert Mueller’s investigation, has links to Russia, too. (NYT)• President Trump plans to deploy National Guard troops to help guard the U.S.’s southwestern border. He’d previously said it would be “our military.” (NYT)• John Kasich is eating at diners in New Hampshire, for some reason. (NYT)• Amalgamated Bank became the latest restrict gun sales by its business customers, following guidelines published by the Mike Bloomberg-backed Everytown for Gun Safety. (Amalgamated)More than 3,100 Googlers have signed a petition protesting the tech colossus’s A.I. work with the Defense Department.More from Scott Shane and Dai Wakabayashi of the NYT:The company line: “We’re actively engaged across the company in a comprehensive discussion of this important topic.”In other defense tech news: Oracle’s Safra Catz reportedly argued to Mr. Trump over dinner Tuesday night that the Pentagon’s process for choosing a cloud services contractor was tilted toward Amazon. (Oracle is also bidding.)The tech flyaround• On balance, the U.S. Postal Service probably does pretty well out of Amazon. Its real problem, Barry Ritholtz argues, is Congress.• Spotify shares ended down yesterday at $144.22, but still up on private stock trades earlier this year. One big winner was Sony, which sold 17.2 percent of its stake.• Meet Fin7 (or Carbanak or Cobalt Spider), the criminal group suspected of many prominent data thefts. And a cyberattack on a natural gas pipeline servicer raised questions about the U.S.’s energy system.• Apple is reportedly working on touchless gestures and a curved screen for iPhones. (Bloomberg)The woman suspected of shooting three people at YouTube headquarters before killing herself had become angry with the company’s policies. Police did not say which ones, but she had posted about YouTube pulling ads from videos that it said did not meet its standards.The woman, Nasim Najafi Aghdam, was a social media video star in Iran and had called YouTube a dictatorship because she was making less money from her posts.Also of note: The attack highlighted the tension between Silicon Valley giants’ love of big, open campuses and their security needs.As the two corporate siblings jostle over a potential union — Viacom has reportedly rejected CBS's offer and is preparing a counter bid — who would run the combined company remains a sticking point. Rich Greenfield of BTIG offered a contrarian case against it being Mr. Moonves of CBS, one of the best-regarded media executives around.“The future of a combined Viacom and CBS is going to be driven by an increasing focus on international and scaling up,” he wrote — an agenda better suited to Viacom’s C.E.O., Bob Bakish.• Investor withdrawals at Bill Ackman’s Pershing Square Capital Management are huge. (WSJ)• Starboard Value plans to continue pressing its proxy fight at Newell Brands. Carl Icahn, who has settled on that one, is off trying to replace the board at SandRidge Energy.• The judge overseeing the Justice Department’s lawsuit to block AT&T’s takeover of Time Warner asked about settling it through arbitration. (WSJ)• Broadcom is officially a U.S. company now. It still can’t go after Qualcomm. (Broadcom)• Some big drug makers are regretting their deals of 2015 and 2016. (FT)• J.M. Smucker will pay $1.9 billion for Ainsworth Pet Nutrition, which makes Rachael Ray’s dog food brand, and will consider selling its U.S. baking brands like Pillsbury. (Reuters)• SS&C of the U.S. is reportedly trying to top Temenos’s £1.4 billion bid for the British trading software maker Fidessa. (FT)— Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan, in his firm’s latest annual letter, where he also talks taxes, deficits and public policy.• Michael Doppelt has rejoined Irving Place Capital as the investment firm’s head of fund-raising and limited partner relations. (Reuters)• Britain’s requirement that companies with at least 250 staff disclose measures of gender pay gaps is forcing a reckoning at many companies. (NYT)• David Smith, chairman of Sinclair Broadcast Group, says the media is getting his company all wrong. (NYT)• Settlement agreements between Bill O’Reilly and two of his accusers were made public for the first time, offering details about his tactics against sexual harassment allegations. (NYT)• Nike’s top human resources executive told employees the company had “failed to gain traction” in hiring and promoting women and minorities. (WSJ)• Why bond kings love Southern California. (Bloomberg)• A guide to the long war between Bumble and Tinder. (NYT)We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bizday@nytimes.com.“One of our biggest responsibilities is to protect data.”That’s what Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive and co-founder, said just over a week ago after revelations that the data research firm Cambridge Analytica had gained access to the profiles of 50 million Facebook users.Over the past year, the downside of social media companies — Facebook foremost among them — has become glaringly apparent. They have been platforms for information campaigns that influenced elections and endangered lives. They have failed to keep users’ personal information private. And the carefully targeted ads that appear on them can be, well, creepy.Now the drumbeat for regulation of social media on both sides of the aisle — and from many in Silicon Valley — is getting louder by the day. “I think that this certain situation is so dire and has become so large that probably some well-crafted regulation is necessary,” Tim Cook, Apple’s chief executive, said recently.Mr. Zuckerberg may be getting tired of other executives sniping at his company, but he needs to come up with a solution — fast. For several weeks, I’ve been canvassing various technology executives, privacy advocates, academics and others to come up with some ideas about exactly what Facebook could do to fix itself.It is not clear that Facebook will be able to stave off regulators, but Mr. Zuckerberg and his colleagues might want to consider this: a “Why Me?” button. (Google, Amazon and others might want to take note, too.)Facebook suffers from a lack of trust because of the asymmetrical nature of the relationship users have with it. We provide it all sorts of information. But we have no idea how the information is being used, how our data is being harvested, how that data is being commingled and cross-referenced with other data sets and ultimately sold to advertisers. (Facebook already has a button, relatively buried in a list of other items, that it calls “Why Am I Seeing This Ad?” It is, to some degree, a crippled version of what I’m suggesting should be introduced on all of Facebook’s properties.)To his credit, Mr. Zuckerberg does appear to recognize the problem that his company faces over privacy concerns. After acknowledging that protecting users’ data is one of the company’s biggest responsibilities, he went on to say, “If you think about what our services are, at their most basic level, you put some content into a service, whether it’s a photo or a video or a text message — whether it’s Facebook or WhatsApp or Instagram — and you’re trusting that that content is going to be shared with the people you want to share it with.”But the solution Facebook offered last week — putting all of your privacy settings on one screen and blocking some third parties from access to data — is just a Band-Aid. It’s a start, but it doesn’t provide a road map for how your information is being used.That’s where the “Why Me?” button could help. This button would sit next to every advertisement and piece of content that appears before you on all of Facebook’s properties, including Instagram and WhatsApp.If you saw an ad or an article pop up on your screen, you could click the “Why Me?” button. Then you would see a full explanation of why that item was pushed to you.The “Why Me?” explanation would not just include the name of the advertiser, but what keywords, demographics or other information the advertiser specifically targeted. It would also offer a full rundown of how your information fit into the parameters of the advertiser’s request and where that information came from.Maybe Facebook saw that you had clicked on a pair of sneakers on a different service that shares information with Facebook. The “Why Me?” section would show you when and where that information was collected. Did Facebook notice you searched for a new cellphone plan? Facebook would tell how it knew that, too.Did Facebook use artificial intelligence to find your face in an image without you or anyone else labeling it? The “Why Me?” section would show you the images that the artificial intelligence system cross-referenced to identify you. Did Facebook scrape another site or buy information about you that it commingled with the data that you had provided? It would tell you that, too.Most important, at every point in the “explanation tree,” the user would have the option to turn off or disable that specific piece of data. Facebook, of course, could — and probably should — explain the trade-offs of such decisions.The “Why Me?” button could also be extended to content. When a friend or company shares a post, Facebook doesn’t just display it to everyone listed as the poster’s friend or follower. Facebook’s algorithms choose which friends and followers see it based on all sorts of parameters, usually related to the kind of content or how you’ve interacted with the friend in the past.The “Why Me?” button should explain all the data points that are used in the calculation and how they are weighted.The current “Why Am I Seeing This Ad?” often says something like: “Company A wants to reach people ages 18 and older who live or were recently in the United States. This is information based on your Facebook profile and where you’ve connected to the internet.”But it hardly tells you the whole story. Facebook doesn’t say so explicitly, but it allows companies to upload their own databases, cross-reference them with Facebook’s data and use that information to serve ads to users. It also doesn’t say how that other site originally got that information about who you are.In fairness, the “Why Me?” button might create all sorts of problems for Facebook, and its advertisers, too. It would allow users — and rivals — to reverse engineer much of the way the system works. And advertisers would probably object to the idea of making their targeting plans public. But that would be the cost of using such large public platforms with such exact targeting.It has become something of a cliché, but in 1913, before he became a Supreme Court justice, Louis D. Brandeis said, “Sunlight is said to be the best of disinfectants.”It could well be applied today at Facebook — and its peer companies — if it wants to avoid a governmental crackdown.If there was one broad takeaway from the data leak involving Cambridge Analytica, the voter profiling firm that obtained private information from up to 87 million Facebook accounts, it’s that you should hesitate before sharing your data with an unknown brand.This lesson applies to just about everything that touches your personal technology, including the apps that you download to your phone or computer and the free online services that you use. And, yes, it also includes those seemingly harmless personality tests run by some unfamiliar organization on Facebook — the kind that helped Cambridge Analytica get the data on users.To make matters worse, the information that can be stolen from you is becoming increasingly personal. Smartphones, for one, are embedded with microphones, motion sensors and cameras that can spy on your every move if corrupted by a bad actor. Home gadgets like internet-connected thermostats, power outlets and audio speakers are capable of collecting information about what you are doing at home, including listening to your conversations, and knowing when you are away from home.It’s time to stop using technology and the internet as though you were shopping at a supermarket. In a grocery store, you can reasonably assume that the food labels are accurate and the products safe to eat, because the food industry is heavily regulated. The handling of personal digital information, in contrast, is  loosely regulated. There have been scores of obscure companies baiting you with products that purport to improve your life — but actually capitalize on your data.“We don’t really know why we’re trusting that a particular company with access to our data won’t do something like sell it or rent it or share it without our consent,” said Lee Tien, a lawyer for the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a nonprofit that focuses on digital rights.That’s not to say the tech behemoths are innocent. The data leak to Cambridge Analytica was ultimately Facebook’s fault because its app platform allowed data to be harvested from people’s friends lists in the first place. About five years ago, Google had to pay a $7 million fine after acknowledging that it had scooped up passwords, email and other personal data with its Street View mapping project.Yet I am recommending taking extra caution with obscure tech brands because it is something under your control. You can take a pause. Don’t immediately download every app you see in an app store or on the web just because it looks fun. Don’t take every quiz you see on Facebook (even if you are dying to know which “Game of Thrones” character identifies with you). Don’t impulse buy internet-connected devices from unfamiliar brands. Don’t do any of this without first doing some research on the reputations of these vendors and their business models.Here are some examples of when unknown brands did us wrong — and the lessons we can learn.Last year, The New York Times revealed that Uber bought information about Lyft, its main ride-hailing competitor in the United States, from Unroll.me, a free email service that offered to unsubscribe people from marketing emails.How did Unroll.me get data about Lyft? Unroll.me scanned users’ inboxes for information and sold it to other businesses, and Uber paid it for data it found about Lyft receipts. Many consumers found it misleading that a company that promised to rid you of spam from marketers made money by selling your information to marketers and other companies.Here’s the kicker: The truth was always laid out in the privacy policy, which said that “we may collect, use, transfer, sell and disclose nonpersonal information for any purpose” and that data could be used “to build anonymous market research products and services.”In response to the backlash, Unroll.me said it was “heartbreaking” to see that people were upset and pledged to be more transparent about its use of data. The app continues to operate.The lessons. Whenever you have the time, read privacy policies before opting to share your data with a brand. This is a daunting task but a healthy exercise, especially when you are unfamiliar and feeling distrustful toward an obscure company. And do the best you can to research a company’s business model. When a service or product is free, assume that your personal information is being monetized.“We all need to know that whenever you’re not paying for the thing, then you’re paying for the thing in a nonmonetary way,” Mr. Tien said.Last year, an app called Soniac was available for Android phones on the Google Play app store. Soniac marketed itself as a messaging app — and indeed, it included features for sending text messages. The less obvious features: The app was also capable of silently recording audio, taking photos with the camera, placing phone calls and downloading call logs among other features.Lookout, a security firm that follows malicious software for Android devices, alerted Google about Soniac’s hidden abilities last year, and the app was quickly removed from the Play app store.Yet Lookout said its researchers had identified over 1,000 spyware apps with many of the same characteristics that Soniac had. Many of those spyware apps were served in third-party app stores that are not authorized by Google.The company that offered Soniac, Iraqwebservice, had published other spyware apps on the Play store. All of its apps have been removed from Play, but Lookout warned that the spyware would probably resurface in the future.The lessons. For one, before you install an app from a company you’ve never heard of, look at its user reviews and do a web search on the company to see if its services are legitimate. You can also check reputable web publications that review apps, like TouchArcade, CNET and Tom’s Guide.For another, when installing an app, take a close look at what data it is accessing. Smartphone apps will ask for permission for access to certain data and sensors. If an app is asking for data that is unrelated to the product, don’t install it. For example, you can reasonably expect a mapping app to ask for your location data, but it shouldn’t need access to your camera.“If something seems outside of the scope, like if a calculator app tells you it needs to use your webcam, say, ‘What, why?’” said Adam Kujawa, the head of malware intelligence at Malwarebytes, a security firm.Third, avoid downloading apps from unofficial app stores and sites that are not affiliated with large brands. And keep in mind that alternative app stores are particularly ripe for malware, because just about anything can be distributed there, similar to a flea market.Parents, beware: A number of internet products have specifically collected data about children. EchoMetrix is a notorious example. In 2009, the company issued a news release bragging that it had predicted the winner of that year’s “American Idol” singing competition.How did it do that? By looking at children’s private information. The company started in 2004 with the name SearchHelp, offering a parental control app called FamilySafe for parents to monitor their children’s online activities. Five years later, it rebranded itself as EchoMetrix and released Pulse, a tool for providing insight to third-party marketers on youths, by aggregating data from millions of teenagers’ chat transcripts and blog posts, among other sources.EchoMetrix’s practices attracted the attention of the Electronic Privacy Information Center, a privacy rights group, which filed a complaint about the company to the Federal Trade Commission. The group accused EchoMetrix of violating the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act by collecting information on minors without parental consent. In 2010, EchoMetrix reached settlements with the commission and the New York attorney general’s office in which it agreed not to analyze or share information about children’s private communications or online activities. EchoMetrix has since rebranded itself as Protext Mobility, a biotech company.The lessons. Be judicious when choosing tech products for your children. Increasingly, toys are beginning to include internet connections — before buying a “smart” toy, do your homework on what the companies are doing with the data. Common Sense Media, a nonprofit that evaluates content and products for families, is a good place to start your research.Perhaps the most important lesson is to acknowledge that you don’t know anything about the vast majority of brands you engage with on the internet. So tread carefully.“These threats aren’t going away,” Mr. Tien said. “With the expansion of data collection and the expansion of what’s possible to collect, it’s just going to continue to proliferate.”Over the last half decade, few stocks have been more beloved by investors and Wall Street analysts than Facebook. No wonder: After a rocky initial public offering in 2012, it has rolled over one obstacle after another, including the shift to mobile computing and the rise of photo sharing. It delivered revenue and user growth that surpassed even the most optimistic projections.By the end of last year, Facebook had 2.2 billion active users. Its stock rose 53 percent last year, single-handedly accounting for 3.7 percent of the 21.8 percent gain in the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index, according to S.&P. Dow Jones Indices. By early February, its market capitalization had surpassed $560 billion, making it the fifth most valuable company in the index.By then Facebook alone accounted for nearly 2 percent of the S.&P. 500 index, which means that anyone who owns a broad-based stock mutual fund or index fund probably owns Facebook shares. Sophisticated investors and institutions, too, have considerable exposure: Goldman Sachs analysts reported last month that Facebook was the second most widely held stock (after Amazon) by hedge funds.Over 90 percent of Wall Street analysts covering the company deemed Facebook a “buy” in early February, even though, at $195 a share, its price-to-earnings ratio, a common valuation measure, was a lofty 35. (The average ratio now is about 24; historically, it has been about 15.)It was, as Wall Street pundits like to say, “priced for perfection.”Whatever else can be said about Facebook’s recent tribulations, this much is certain: Its situation is far from perfection.After revelations that data harvested from Facebook may have been used to try to influence Britain’s vote to leave the European Union and the United States presidential election, the social network giant faces multiple investigations in both Europe and the United States, along with potentially profit-crimping regulations and limits to its use of data. And investor retribution has been swift.Since hitting its peak on Feb. 2, Facebook has lost an astonishing $100 billion in market capitalization. Its stock was trading midweek at close to $153 a share, a decline of nearly 22 percent. (It rebounded by about 4.5 percent Thursday and closed at $159.79.)With Facebook’s plunge, investor concerns have spread to other social media and internet stocks with lofty multiples, like the so-called FANG stocks — Facebook, Apple and Amazon, Netflix and Google — and Twitter. They accounted for more than 10 percent of the S.&P. 500 at their peak.“People who own an index fund need to realize how important Facebook is, and how big a role it and the FANG stocks played in the market’s rise,” said Howard Silverblatt, senior industry analyst for the S.&P. Dow Jones Indices, who oversees statistical analysis for the S.&P. 500. “The FANG leadership is faltering. Social media hasn’t faced much regulation, and now there’s a cloud hanging over those companies.”In the midst of past Facebook euphoria, few saw this coming. One that did was Aiera, a robot that uses artificial intelligence to make stock recommendations. Aiera, an acronym for artificially intelligent equity research analyst, put out a “sell” recommendation for Facebook last fall.So did Brian Wieser, a senior analyst at Pivotal Research Group  who covers media and internet companies. Although he was positive about the stock for most of its long climb, he downgraded Facebook to “sell” last summer based on regulatory and advertiser concerns and what he now considers “systemic management issues.”Not only was it a lonely position, but “the stock went up and up,” Mr. Wieser told me this week. “But I thought the market was wrong, full stop.”“I didn’t know what the catalyst would be, but at some point revenue growth had to slow and the margins go down,” he said. “There are practical limits. And I felt investors were looking at Facebook in much too positive a light. They just ignored all the bad things, and there were a lot of them.”Then, when the news broke this month that a British firm, Cambridge Analytica, had used Facebook data for voter profiling, Mr. Wieser said, he thought it was “the most significant thing that had happened to Facebook since it became a public company.”“Most people hadn’t given much thought to how their data is used,” he added. “But this really exposed the potential abuse. This is digital advertising’s original sin, and there’s going to be a reckoning that even now I don’t think most investors fully appreciate.”The other Facebook skeptic, Aiera, can talk, but Wells Fargo — whose global internet analyst, Ken Sena, developed the robot along with Bryan Healey — wasn’t making its wunderkind available for interviews. But based on Aiera’s published comments, it issued its sell recommendation after analyzing the frequency of negative mentions in the media of Russia’s use of Facebook to influence the presidential election, as well as fundamental valuation and technical factors. (Aiera uses artificial intelligence to read and analyze a half-million pieces of data per day gleaned from the internet. It currently analyzes more than 1,600 stocks.)Wells Fargo has stressed that Aiera remains in experimental mode, but one potential advantage is that it removes all human emotion from its analysis. Thus, Aiera was indifferent to the fact that nearly every other analyst had a buy recommendation on Facebook.That included her putative master, Mr. Sena, who was thrust into the somewhat awkward position of explaining his own buy recommendation even as Aiera said sell.When I spoke to him this week, Mr. Sena stressed that Aiera was a tool that could detect patterns and eliminate bias. “Aiera said election interference was a big deal, and it turned out it was a big deal,” Mr. Sena said. “But it’s not meant to supplant human judgments.”He hasn’t changed his buy recommendation even though he agrees with Mr. Wieser that investors need to take threats of regulation seriously. “The conventional wisdom was that people don’t care that much about how their data is used,” Mr. Sena said. “They like the convenience of targeted advertising. But the level of public outcry over this is new.’’“Facebook is going to have to do a lot of explaining,’’ he added. “I believe they have the capability and the technology to make the platform secure. But it’s going to distract from other initiatives investors are counting on for growth, like virtual reality and video content.”Even so, Facebook’s decline has been so steep that even Mr. Wieser and Aiera may reassess their recommendations if they calculate that the stock has bottomed out.When he last reiterated his sell recommendation, Mr. Wieser’s price target was $152. “I don’t want to be trigger happy on this,” he said. “It’s not clear yet what happens next. I want to fine-tune my thoughts before I revisit this.”Aiera canceled her sell recommendation after the stock plunged. She hasn’t yet made a new recommendation. Of 45 analysts who cover Facebook, 41 currently have a “buy” or “overweight” recommendation, up from 39 a month ago.Mr. Sena is even more bullish on Facebook than he was before, and hasn’t changed his price target of $230. “People are still glued to Facebook and Instagram,” he said.Its price-to-earnings ratio is now just 28, barely above the market average, which makes it “the cheapest stock in our coverage area, and it has some of the best growth prospects,” he said. “There’s no way mathematically to justify a loss of more than $70 billion in market cap.”We’re not taking scheduled flights into space, and we’re certainly not booking them on the long-bankrupt Pan Am airlines. But much about Stanley Kubrick’s “2001: A Space Odyssey,” which was released 50 years ago this week, has proved prophetic. In our era of Siri and Alexa, that particularly applies to the film’s forecast that we would speak with computers powered by some form of artificial intelligence. (In the movie, Pan Am provided shuttle service to a space station stop on the way to the moon.)Many Canadians know that Douglas Rain, the acclaimed actor who was born in Winnipeg and who became closely associated with the Stratford Festival, provided the voice for HAL 9000, the film’s computer, in a performance that some reviewers found to be a highlight of the film.Gerry Flahive, a filmmaker from Toronto, has written a fascinating article for The Times about how Mr. Rain became HAL. Mr. Kubrick was taken with his work on a National Film Board of Canada production, “Universe,” that the director particularly liked. But also high on the list was Mr. Rain’s Standard Canadian English accent, which non-Canadians often find hard to place.Mr. Flahive was a documentary producer at the film board for 33 years. His credits include “A Short History of The High Rise,”  which was a joint production with the The New York Times Op-Docs.Here’s a condensed and edited version of a conversation we had this week:Do you remember watching “2001” at the time of its release?I was 11 when I saw it at the Glendale Theatre in Toronto in Cinerama and it just completely blew my mind. And that’s what got me interested in filmmaking. It almost seemed like a documentary to me. It was such a realistic depiction of the future.As I was getting ready to leave the film board, I thought that this is an interest of mine and that I could dig a bit deeper into it and so I wrote to Douglas Rain.Did the film have a similar effect on Mr. Rain?It was just a job for him. It doesn’t really mean anything to him and he’s never seen the film.He was hired to do the narration for what was going to be an elaborate prologue to “2001.” They filmed interviews with all these amazing scientists and thinkers to set up the premise for the film and explain the context. But Kubrick stripped it away and didn’t use the narration he’d hired Rain to do.I think if Kubrick had kept all of the explanatory things it wouldn’t it wouldn’t be the classic that it is.So how did Mr. Rain move from there to becoming HAL?It was going to be Martin Balsam’s voice. And even before that it was going to be a female voice. HAL was going to be an Athena.So the voice was probably just a combination of circumstance and a gut choice by Kubrick. He literally said to Rain, ‘I’m not happy what I have in the can,’ meaning the Martin Balsam recording that had been done a year before. ‘Would you like to play the computer?’ And then, in a day and a half, it was done.When I spoke to a linguist he said absolutely that HAL does not have a mid-Atlantic accent as Kubrick kind of thought. It’s Standard Canadian English.Why is Mr. Rain indifferent toward the film?Even though it was done quickly and I don’t think Rain had a very good time doing it, it was fantastic combination of Rain’s performance, Kubrick’s decision to use that voice and to edit it in a way that really brought that character to life.But I’m sure if I were Rain I wouldn’t want it to define my career. It would be like Alec Guinness being known just for Obi-Wan Kenobi and nothing else.Read: The Story of a Voice: HAL in ‘2001’ Wasn’t Always So Eerily CalmThe disclosures surrounding what Cambridge Analytica did with Facebook users’ data continue. This week the company estimated that the political consulting firm connected to President Trump’s campaign improperly used data from about 87 million accounts, including more than 600,000 in Canada. Its chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, is scheduled to explain what happened next week to Congress.A large number of you send thoughtful replies to my questions last week about how the misuse, which was initially revealed by Canadian whistle-blower Christopher Wylie, has changed the way you use Facebook. Here are a few of the highlights:I was pretty confident that an organization such as Facebook, with so much success and resources, would act smart and responsible. That is not the case we learned — not at all! I am shocked and I will surely do something.If there’s a lesson to be learned from this, it is that on the long run, free stuff is fishy!—Guy Pierre Poulin, St. Sauveur, QuebecI was a relatively early adopter to Facebook back in early-2005 as an undergraduate student at the University of Alberta. Since 2012 I have deleted as much data associated with my profile as possible and have not logged on or messaged anybody through Facebook.I had privacy concerns and it was a source of distraction and agitation. But I was also perceiving others in my peer group as moving swiftly ahead with their lives, in all aspects, whereas I had felt inadequate.Quitting Facebook about six years ago has been very positive decision. It’s allowed for more focused “deep work” and to be more engaged fully with people.—Ravendra Naidoo, OttawaThe last few weeks of angst about Facebook has not changed my mind about continuing to use social media. It is the way I stay in touch with others with like interests around the globe. I do not put anything on my FB page that is not for public consumption. I limit those who can view my information and posts to friends. I unfriend anyone who posts disgusting things and stop following people who post too much. My social media account is my enjoyment and pleasure. Why would I give that up?—Louann Hansen, AlbertaI suspended my Facebook account a few months ago and never looked back. I really felt it was designed to be addictive and my brain couldn’t resist. I still think about friends who I may have known a bit more about if I had stayed. But those thoughts also prompt me to reconnect with them in a more active way, like email, phone or in person. I can no longer vent about politics by posting. So I now realize that any anger I feel should either be ignored or focused on something more active than pressing “post.”Suspending Facebook made me much happier right away, an instant gratification that no social media activity ever gave me!—Tim Wilbur, TorontoAlthough the weather doesn’t seem much like it in many regions, it is April, and time for the latest post from Watching, The Times’s guide to viewing, tailored for Netflix users in Canada. The recommendations include “The Florida Project,” “‘Monty Python and the Holy Grail” and “‘Lost in Space,” a Netflix revival of the 1960s television series. As always, please be aware that Netflix sometimes changes its mind about what it will show in Canada after Watching has compiled its viewers’ guide.Read: The Best Movies and TV Shows New to Netflix Canada in AprilAnd for those of you who are sticking with Facebook and its subsidiaries, The Times’s new gender initiative is now on Instagram.In Opinion, Jesse Brown, the host of a podcast about the Canadian media, argues that Jordan Peterson, the University of Toronto psychologist and author who is seen as leading a challenge against political correctness and activism, is much more typical of Canadians than Prime Minister Justin Trudeau.Christopher Wylie, the Cambridge Analytica whistle-blower, brought Canada into a story that’s drawn intense scrutiny to Facebook this week. And it’s not just because he’s from Victoria, British Columbia.After focusing close attention on the social network with the disclosure that Cambridge used personal data from millions of the social media site’s users without permission to help Donald J. Trump’s election campaign, Mr. Wylie brought a company from his hometown, Aggregate IQ, into the fray this week during testimony before Britain’s Parliament.In his testimony, Mr. Wylie said that Aggregrate, a subsidiary of Cambridge Analytica’s parent, drew on Cambridge’s Facebook data to sway social media opinion in favor of the Leave side in the 2016 British referendum on the European Union vote, and he repeated claims that the Canadian company was used to avoid British campaign spending limits. (The company has denied the claims.)Attention inevitably turned to Mr. Wylie’s activities in Canada. When he was 19, Mr. Wylie worked briefly in the office of Michael Ignatieff, then the Liberal leader. Then early in 2016, when Mr. Trump’s victory was not being widely predicted, Mr. Wylie, through a company called Eunoia Technologies, was given a 100,000 Canadian dollar contract by the Liberal Caucus Research Bureau. Like all of the political parties’ research shops, the bureau is separate from the party’s other operations and is funded by Parliament.Melissa Cotton, the bureau’s managing director, said in a statement that Mr. Wylie did not have access to the party’s data and that he worked on projects that appeared to have involved monitoring social media, identifying issues and analyzing how Liberal members communicate with voters.“Preliminary work was done by Eunoia Technologies but after seeing what was offered, Liberal Caucus Research Bureau decided not to move forward.” Ms. Cotton said, without explaining why it cut ties.Mr. Wylie’s time in Ottawa, however, brought to light something that most people have overlooked. Unlike businesses and the federal government itself, federal political parties aren’t subject to Canada’s internet privacy and data protection laws.Some of those laws date to the 1980s and the federal privacy commissioner, among others, has been calling for a 21st century update. But while Canada lags behind Europe in this area, it’s still well ahead of the United States.The political party exemption came about in part because of a parliamentary tradition of not giving bureaucrats or outside bodies control over a party’s affairs. I called Michael Pal, an assistant law professor at the University of Ottawa who studies election laws and related issues like voter suppression, and asked if it’s time for a change.“Every other sector is covered by privacy laws but political parties,” he said. “They are all using data so I don’t think there is a good argument about why they should be under privacy rules.”As for concerns about encroaching on Parliament, Professor Pal isn’t buying that either. He noted that parties were already “heavily regulated” through Elections Canada and election fund-raising laws.So what’s a Facebook user to do now? My colleague Brian X. Chen, who writes about consumer technology, has offered some guidance on minimizing privacy risks on Facebook, although his overall take on the situation facing Facebook users is a little discouraging:What about deleting old Facebook and Twitter posts? Brian tried it and found that his “delete-everything approach was probably not worth most people’s time. And even after all that time, my Facebook timeline was still decorated with posts that my friends had published about me — including photos from my 21st birthday (need I say more?) — because that content was not mine to delete.”That, of course, leaves the option of quitting social media. And that’s what I’m interested in hearing about from you. Have the last couple of weeks turned your mind toward leaving Facebook or other social media sites? If you’re inclined, do you think it’s possible to leave? And if you leave, what will you lose and what will you gain? Please send your thoughts to nytcanada@nytimes.com.Read: How Trump Consultants Exploited the Facebook Data of MillionsRead: Cambridge Analytica Whistle-Blower Contends Data-Mining Swung Brexit VoteRead: How to Protect Yourself (and Your Friends) on FacebookRead: Want to Purge Your Social Media Timelines? Can You Spare a Few Hours?About a year ago, I wrote about how the house where the Dionne quintuplets were born faced an uncertain future. The birth, and survival, of the quints at the height of the Great Depression was both a global sensation and a tale of grave injustice. The girls were taken from their family and made wards of the province of Ontario, ostensibly to protect them from exploitation. But the government turned around and exhibited almost like zoo animals. Millions of visitors viewed them from a special gallery.Other injustices and misfortune followed the five through their lives. The decision by the City of North Bay to turn over the log house to a village without the obvious means to maintain or restore it looked like the latest one.But much has changed in the past year. After a public campaign, North Bay reversed its decision, and the house has been moved to downtown where it will become a museum.And this week, The Historic Sites and Monuments Board of Canada designated the birth of the quints an event of national historical significance.Carlo Tarini, a friend who acts as the family’s spokesman, told me this week that Annette and Cécile, the two surviving sisters, are doing well, although Cécile was hospitalized for a time in January because of pneumonia.“In the pre-internet decades of the 30s and 40s, the worldwide fascination they sparked as children brings shade to the Kardashian kids popularity,” Mr. Tarini wrote in an email.Read: 2 Survivors of Canada’s First Quintuplet Clan Reluctantly Re-emerge—The Protestant churches involved in a system that took Indigenous children away from their families to boarding schools apologized for their role in during the 1990s. While the Truth and Reconciliation Commission has asked Pope Francis to follow suit, he rejected the idea.—Alexandre Bissonnette, who killed six men at a mosque in Quebec City last year, pleaded guilty to first degree murder this week. While the move brought relief to survivors and the families of victims, the lack of a trial means that questions about his transformation from university student to killer may go unanswered.—Rusty Staub, le Grand Orange to Montrealers, has died at the age of 73. During his time with the Montreal Expos, Mr. Staub endeared himself to Quebecers on the field.—Peter Munk, who created one of Canada’s biggest business fiascos at Clairtone and then rebounded to build the world’s largest gold mining company, has died at the age of 90 in Toronto.BRUSSELS —  Facebook has confirmed that the data of 2.7 million EU citizens were among those improperly used by political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, the EU executive said on Friday.The European Commission said it received a letter from the social media giant late on Thursday and that it would press for more details, piling pressure on the firm that has lost more than $100 billion in market value in the last 10 days."Facebook confirmed to us that the data of overall up to 2.7 million Europeans or people in the EU to be more precise may have been improperly shared with Cambridge Analytica," a Commission spokesman said."The letter also explains the steps Facebook has taken in response since."(Reporting by Alissa de Carbonnel @AdeCar; Editing by Robert-Jan Bartunek)VANCOUVER —  The Canadian federal agency charged with protecting privacy rights of individuals said on Thursday that it, along with its counterpart in British Columbia, will jointly investigate Facebook Inc and Canadian data firm AggregateIQ, over an ongoing data sharing scandal.The Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada said the probes, which broaden two existing investigations, will look at whether the companies broke federal and provincial personal privacy rules.Canada's privacy commissioner launched an investigation of Facebook in March after the New York Times and London's Observer newspaper broke news of the use of Facebook data by political consultancy Cambridge Analytica.Facebook Canada said on Wednesday that more than 600,000 Canadians had their data "improperly shared" with Cambridge Analytica.British Columbia's privacy commissioner was separately investigating AggregateIQ over whether the Victoria-based company had broken provincial personal privacy rules for its role in the Brexit campaign.The two agencies will now jointly investigate the companies, as they are subject to both federal and provincial personal privacy laws.(Reporting by Julie Gordon in Vancouver; Editing by Chris Reese and Richard Chang)LONDON —  Facebook's Chief Technology Officer Mike Schroepfer will answer questions from British lawmakers on the social media giant's recent data scandal on April 26, a parliamentary  committee said on Friday.Facebook Inc said on Wednesday the personal information of up to 87 million users, mostly in the United States, may have been improperly shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, up from a previous estimates.Lawmakers had asked Facebook chief executive Mark Zuckerberg or another senior Facebook executive to explain to a parliamentary committee how the data got into Cambridge Analytica's hands. Committee chair Damien Collins has said it was "astonishing" that Zuckerberg was not prepared to answer questions himself.The Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee said it would also hear from former Cambridge Analytica chief executive Alexander Nix on April 18, his second hearing, as well as from Aleksandr Kogan, a research associate at the centre of the scandal, on 24 April.(Reporting by Alistair Smout; editing by Stephen Addison)JAKARTA, Indonesia —  Indonesian government said Friday it is investigating Facebook over the privacy breach of its Indonesian users.The Ministry of Communications and Information Technology said in a statement that it had asked the National Police chief to investigate possible violations of Indonesia's privacy law a day after Facebook announced that personal data of more than 1 million Indonesians might have been exposed by political consultant Cambridge Analytica.It said Facebook representatives in Indonesia could face up to 12 years in prison and a fine of $871,000, if convicted.The ministry summoned the representatives late Thursday to deliver a warning letter.Communications Minister Rudiantara told reporters after the meeting that he has asked Facebook to stop its applications that could allow third parties to get users' personal information."We ask Facebook to provide us their audit results to see how the personal information is used by the Cambridge Analytica," said Rudiantara, who like many Indonesians uses a single name.Facebook Indonesia Head of Public Policy Ruben Hattari said they will keep cooperating with the Indonesian government."Our main goal is to secure privacy data of all Facebook users," Hattari said after the meeting.Indonesia is the world's fourth-largest Facebook user with more than 115 million active members, and nearly 97 percent of them are on mobile devices.SAN FRANCISCO —  Facebook Inc said on Wednesday that the personal information of up to 87 million users, mostly in the United States, may have been improperly shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, up from a previous news media estimate of more than 50 million.Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said in a conference call with reporters that Facebook had not seen "any meaningful impact" on usage or ad sales since the scandal, although he added, "it's not good" if people are unhappy with the company.Shares rose more than 3 percent after the bell.Zuckerberg told reporters that he accepted blame for the data leak, which has angered users, advertisers and lawmakers, while also saying he was still the right person to head the company he founded."When you're building something like Facebook that is unprecedented in the world, there are going to be things that you mess up," Zuckerberg said, adding that the important thing was to learn from mistakes.He said he was not aware of any discussions on the Facebook board about him stepping down, although directors would face a challenge if they wanted to oust him because Zuckerberg is the controlling shareholder.He said he had not fired anyone over the scandal and did not plan to. "I'm not looking to throw anyone else under the bus for mistakes that we made here," he said.Facebook first acknowledged last month that personal information about millions of users wrongly ended up in the hands of Cambridge Analytica.Zuckerberg will testify about the matter next Tuesday and Wednesday during two U.S. congressional hearings.London-based Cambridge Analytica, which has counted U.S. President Donald Trump's 2016 campaign among its clients, disputed Facebook's estimate of affected users. It said in a tweet on Wednesday that it received no more than 30 million records from a researcher it hired to collect data about people on Facebook.Zuckerberg, on the call with reporters, said Facebook should have done more to audit and oversee third-party app developers like the one that Cambridge Analytica hired in 2014."Knowing what I know today, clearly we should have done more," he said.Going forward, he said, Facebook was taking steps to restrict which personal data is available to third-party app developers, and he said it might take two more years to fix Facebook's problems. (https://bit.ly/2Ejpktb)"We're broadening our view of our responsibility," Zuckerberg said.Most of the up to 87 million people whose data was shared with Cambridge Analytica were in the United States, Facebook Chief Technology Officer Mike Schroepfer wrote in a blog post. (Graphic: https://bit.ly/2q5r5pl)Shares in Facebook closed down 0.6 percent on Wednesday to $155.10. They have tumbled more than 16 percent since the Cambridge Analytica scandal broke.The previous estimate of more than 50 million Facebook users affected by the data leak came from two newspapers, the New York Times and London's Observer, based on their investigations of Cambridge Analytica.Zuckerberg said Facebook came to the higher estimate by looking at the number of people who had downloaded a personality quiz app created by Cambridge University academic Aleksandr Kogan, or about 270,000 people, and then adding in the number of friends they had.Cambridge Analytica has said that it engaged Kogan "in good faith" to collect Facebook data in a manner similar to how other third-party app developers have harvested personal information.The scandal has kicked off investigations by Britain's Information Commissioner's Office, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission and by some 37 U.S. state attorneys general.Nigeria's government will investigate allegations of improper involvement by Cambridge Analytica in that country's 2007 and 2015 elections, a presidency spokesman said on Monday.(Reporting by David Ingram in San Francisco; Additional reporting by Arjun Panchadar in Bengaluru and Eric Auchard in London; Editing by Lisa Shumaker)WASHINGTON —  Facebook Inc Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg will testify next week before congressional committees over a political consulting firm's misuse of customer data to interfere in the U.S. presidential election, U.S. lawmakers said on Wednesday.Zuckerberg will appear before a joint hearing of the U.S. Senate Judiciary and Commerce committees on April 10 and the U.S. House Energy and Commerce Committee on April 11, the panels said on Wednesday."This hearing will be an important opportunity to shed light on critical consumer data privacy issues and help all Americans better understand what happens to their personal information online," the House panel's Republican chairman, Greg Walden, and top Democrat, Frank Pallone, said in a statement.Facebook has come under fire in recent weeks after it was disclosed that political consulting firm Cambridge Analytica, which worked for Donald Trump's presidential campaign, gained access to the personal data of 50 million Facebook users.Facebook said in March it had suspended the accounts of Cambridge Analytica and its parent company and hired forensic auditors to probe whether Cambridge Analytica still had the data.The technology company also said at the time it would investigate all applications that had gotten access to large amounts of data before the firm changed its platform in 2014, would further restrict developers' data access and roll out a tool to let users more easily revoke access by applications to their data.Zuckerberg said in March he would testify before Congress, but turned down an invitation by British lawmakers to explain to a parliamentary committee what had happened.The company has faced pressure to do more, both in terms of protecting user privacy and stopping "information warfare" on its platform.In February, 13 Russian nationals were indicted for using Facebook and other social media sites to interfere in the U.S. presidential election.On Tuesday, Facebook said it had removed hundreds of accounts and pages associated with the Russia-based Internet Research Agency that included fake activist and political posts in the 2016 U.S. election campaign.American spy agencies have warned that Russia would try to interfere in the 2018 congressional elections by using social media to spread propaganda.Shares in Facebook closed down 0.6 percent on Wednesday to $155.10. They have tumbled more than 16 percent since the Cambridge Analytica scandal broke.(Reporting by Makini Brice; Additional reporting by Eric Beech; Editing by Jeffrey Benkoe and Peter Cooney)SYDNEY —  Australia's Privacy Commissioner said on Thursday she had opened a formal investigation into social media giant Facebook Inc after the company confirmed data from 300,000 Australian users may have been used without authorisation.The investigation will consider whether Facebook has breached Australia's privacy laws, Privacy Commissioner Angelene Falk said in a statement.Facebook said on Wednesday that the personal information of up to 87 million users, mostly in the United States, may have been improperly shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, up from a previous news media estimate of more than 50 million.(Reporting by Tom Westbrook; Editing by Michael Perry)BERLIN —  German Justice Minister Katarina Barley said she planned a further meeting with Facebook to discuss the impact of its algorithms on the social network's users, adding that recent disclosures of privacy violations were probably not isolated.Facebook said on Wednesday that the personal information of up to 87 million users, mostly in the United States, may have been improperly shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, more than previous estimates."I plan a further discussion with Facebook to discuss the question of algorithms [which] govern how people are categorized according to their usage of data," Barley told reporters on Thursday.Data privacy is a sensitive subject in Germany, where memories of the two 20th-century police states on its territory have spurred the government to take a leading role in pushing for tighter regulation of data-driven Internet giants.A poll for ARD public television found that 61 percent of Germany's internet users were concerned that their data had been misused, though only 12 percent said they had cut back on Facebook usage. A further 2 percent had stopped altogether.The meeting with Barley will be the social network's second such summons from the German government since the New York Times and London's Observer newspaper broke news of the use of its data by Cambridge Analytica on March 16. Facebook shares have since lost 16 percent, wiping more than $80 billion from its market value."We should have no illusions: the Cambridge Analytica cases won't be the only ones and Facebook is probably not the only Internet giant where similar doubtful cases occurred," Barley said on Thursday. "It's probably just the tip of the iceberg."Earlier, the British Information Commissioner's Office (ICO) said Facebook was co-operating with its examination into how 30 organizations have used personal data, but that it was too early to say whether the social media giant had done enough.The ICO said it was looking at how data was collected from a third party app on Facebook and shared with Cambridge Analytica, as well as a broader investigation into how social media platforms have been used in political campaigning.(Reporting by Thomas Escritt; Editing by Paul Carrel and Catherine Evans)WASHINGTON —  Investigators on two congressional panels are looking into whether Russia acquired the data of millions of Facebook users and if companies with ties to then-2016 Republican election candidate Donald Trump's campaign played any role in providing it, three sources familiar with the inquiries said.On Tuesday, Facebook said it had deleted 70 Facebook accounts, 138 Facebook pages and 65 Instagram accounts that it said were "controlled" by the Internet Research Agency (IRA), a Russian propaganda arm based in St. Petersburg.Last September, Facebook disclosed that it had suspended about 470 "inauthentic accounts" that it believed were "likely operated out of Russia" and had purchased 3,000 ads which "appeared to focus on amplifying divisive social and political messages."And on Wednesday, the social media platform said the personal information of up to 87 million users, mostly in the United States, may have been improperly shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, up from a previous news media estimate of more than 50 million. Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg will testify on April 10 and 11 to Congress.In an indictment in February, Robert Mueller, the special counsel investigating possible Russian meddling in the 2016 U.S. presidential campaign, charged IRA and 13 Russians with conspiring to interfere in U.S. politics and elections. Moscow denies tampering in U.S. elections and President Trump denies any coordination between his campaign and Russian officials.Among the issues investigators on the U.S. Senate Intelligence Committee and Democrats on the House Intelligence Committee are digging into are whether IRA and other Russian organizations used any Facebook data, the sources said, speaking on condition of anonymity. Also, whether the use of such data had any impact on the U.S. election, and how much Facebook data may have been acquired by Russian entities, the sources said.Zuckerberg last month disclosed that in 2013, Cambridge University academic Aleksandr Kogan, who ran a company called Global Science Research (GSR), created a personality quiz app that was installed by about 300,000 Facebook users.Zuckerberg said that because of the way the Facebook platform worked at the time, this gave Kogan access to data of "tens of millions" of friends of users who took the quiz.On Wednesday, Mike Schroepfer, Facebook's Chief Technology Officer, acknowledged in a public posting that "the Facebook information of up to 87 million people - mostly in the US - may have been improperly shared" with Cambridge Analytica.Zuckerberg said Facebook learned in 2015 that Kogan shared data from his app with Cambridge Analytica. The London-based consulting firm received millions of dollars from the Trump campaign and a political action committee supported by financier Robert Mercer, who supported Trump. Zuckerberg said Kogan "misused" Facebook's data.Cambridge Analytica said in a statement on Wednesday that it "did not use any" data it acquired from Kogan's company in work related to the 2016 U.S. presidential campaign. The firm added that it took legal action against GSR, and that it "immediately deleted the raw data" from its server when it learned from Facebook that the data had been "improperly obtained."Representative Adam Schiff, the House intelligence committee's top Democrat, sent Kogan a letter requesting correspondence and message traffic on his dealings with Cambridge Analytica and former Trump adviser Steve Bannon, any material related to Russia, and that Kogan agree to an interview.Kogan said in an email to Reuters that he knows nothing about Facebook data being obtained by Russia and had never heard of the Internet Research Agency "until a few weeks ago."(Reporting By Mark Hosenball; editing by John Walcott and Grant McCool)WASHINGTON —  Investigators on two congressional panels are looking into whether Russia acquired the data of millions of Facebook users and if companies with ties to then-2016 Republican election candidate Donald Trump's campaign played any role in providing it, three sources familiar with the inquiries said.On Tuesday, Facebook said it had deleted 70 Facebook accounts, 138 Facebook pages and 65 Instagram accounts that it said were "controlled" by the Internet Research Agency (IRA), a Russian propaganda arm based in St. Petersburg.Last September, Facebook disclosed that it had suspended about 470 "inauthentic accounts" that it believed were "likely operated out of Russia" and had purchased 3,000 ads which "appeared to focus on amplifying divisive social and political messages."And on Wednesday, the social media platform said the personal information of up to 87 million users, mostly in the United States, may have been improperly shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, up from a previous news media estimate of more than 50 million. Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg will testify on April 10 and 11 to Congress.In an indictment in February, Robert Mueller, the special counsel investigating possible Russian meddling in the 2016 U.S. presidential campaign, charged IRA and 13 Russians with conspiring to interfere in U.S. politics and elections. Moscow denies tampering in U.S. elections and President Trump denies any coordination between his campaign and Russian officials.Among the issues investigators on the U.S. Senate Intelligence Committee and Democrats on the House Intelligence Committee are digging into are whether IRA and other Russian organizations used any Facebook data, the sources said, speaking on condition of anonymity. Also, whether the use of such data had any impact on the U.S. election, and how much Facebook data may have been acquired by Russian entities, the sources said.Zuckerberg last month disclosed that in 2013, Cambridge University academic Aleksandr Kogan, who ran a company called Global Science Research (GSR), created a personality quiz app that was installed by about 300,000 Facebook users.Zuckerberg said that because of the way the Facebook platform worked at the time, this gave Kogan access to data of "tens of millions" of friends of users who took the quiz.On Wednesday, Mike Schroepfer, Facebook's Chief Technology Officer, acknowledged in a public posting that "the Facebook information of up to 87 million people - mostly in the US - may have been improperly shared" with Cambridge Analytica.Zuckerberg said Facebook learned in 2015 that Kogan shared data from his app with Cambridge Analytica. The London-based consulting firm received millions of dollars from the Trump campaign and a political action committee supported by financier Robert Mercer, who supported Trump. Zuckerberg said Kogan "misused" Facebook's data.Cambridge Analytica said in a statement on Wednesday that it "did not use any" data it acquired from Kogan's company in work related to the 2016 U.S. presidential campaign. The firm added that it took legal action against GSR, and that it "immediately deleted the raw data" from its server when it learned from Facebook that the data had been "improperly obtained."Representative Adam Schiff, the House intelligence committee's top Democrat, sent Kogan a letter requesting correspondence and message traffic on his dealings with Cambridge Analytica and former Trump adviser Steve Bannon, any material related to Russia, and that Kogan agree to an interview.Kogan said in an email to Reuters that he knows nothing about Facebook data being obtained by Russia and had never heard of the Internet Research Agency "until a few weeks ago."(Reporting By Mark Hosenball; editing by John Walcott and Grant McCool)WASHINGTON —  Facebook Inc Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg will testify next week before congressional committees over a political consulting firm's misuse of customer data to interfere in the U.S. presidential election, U.S. lawmakers said on Wednesday.    Zuckerberg will appear before a joint hearing of the U.S. Senate Judiciary and Commerce committees on April 10 and the U.S. House Energy and Commerce Committee on April 11, the panels said on Wednesday."This hearing will be an important opportunity to shed light on critical consumer data privacy issues and help all Americans better understand what happens to their personal information online," the House panel's Republican chairman, Greg Walden, and top Democrat, Frank Pallone, said in a statement.Facebook has come under fire in recent weeks after it was disclosed that political consulting firm Cambridge Analytica, which worked for Donald Trump's presidential campaign, gained access to the personal data of 50 million Facebook users.Facebook said in March it had suspended the accounts of Cambridge Analytica and its parent company and hired forensic auditors to probe whether Cambridge Analytica still had the data.The technology company also said at the time it would investigate all applications that had gotten access to large amounts of data before the firm changed its platform in 2014, would further restrict developers' data access and roll out a tool to let users more easily revoke access by applications to their data.Zuckerberg said in March he would testify before Congress, but turned down an invitation by British lawmakers to explain to a parliamentary committee what had happened.The company has faced pressure to do more, both in terms of protecting user privacy and stopping "information warfare" on its platform.In February, 13 Russian nationals were indicted for using Facebook and other social media sites to interfere in the U.S. presidential election.On Tuesday, Facebook said it had removed hundreds of accounts and pages associated with the Russia-based Internet Research Agency that included fake activist and political posts in the 2016 U.S. election campaign.American spy agencies have warned that Russia would try to interfere in the 2018 congressional elections by using social media to spread propaganda.Shares in Facebook closed down 0.6 percent on Wednesday to $155.10. They have tumbled more than 16 percent since the Cambridge Analytica scandal broke.(Reporting by Makini Brice; Additional reporting by Eric Beech; Editing by Jeffrey Benkoe and Peter Cooney)NEW DELHI —  India's government has sent a notice to Facebook asking whether the personal data of Indian voters and users has been compromised by U.K.-based Cambridge Analytica or any other downstream entity.A similar notice was dispatched to Cambridge Analytica last week following media reports that it had misused data to profile Indians and influence their elections. The government set a Saturday deadline for Cambridge Analytica and April 7 for Facebook to respond to its inquiry.Facebook is facing unprecedented scrutiny following reports that the data mining firm used ill-gotten data from tens of millions of its users to try to influence elections.India's Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology said in a statement late Wednesday that Facebook has its largest footprint in India in terms of its user base and sought to know "what proactive measures it is taking to ensure the safety, security and privacy of such large user data and to prevent its misuse by any third party."The governing Bharatiya Janata Party and the main opposition Congress Party have accused each other of utilizing the services of the British company, but denied any link with it. Cambridge Analytica's allegedly unauthorized harvesting of Facebook data and a series of leaks linked to India's biometric database has refocused public attention on digital privacy in the country.Digital law experts say Indian regulations offered particularly weak safeguards against data breach.The Indian government's notice to Facebook sought to know "whether Facebook or its related or downstream agencies utilizing Facebook's data have previously been engaged by any entities to manipulate the Indian electoral process.""If any such downstream entity misused data from Facebook, what is the protection available to the data subject?" it asked.WASHINGTON —  Investigators on two congressional panels are looking into whether Russia acquired the data of millions of Facebook users and if companies with ties to then-2016 Republican election candidate Donald Trump's campaign played any role in providing it, three sources familiar with the inquiries said.On Tuesday, Facebook said it had deleted 70 Facebook accounts, 138 Facebook pages and 65 Instagram accounts that it said were "controlled" by the Internet Research Agency (IRA), a  Russian propaganda arm based in St. Petersburg.Last September, Facebook disclosed that it had suspended about 470 "inauthentic accounts" that it believed were "likely operated out of Russia" and had purchased 3,000 ads which "appeared to focus on amplifying divisive social and political messages."And on Wednesday, the social media platform said the personal information of up to 87 million users, mostly in the United States, may have been improperly shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, up from a previous news media estimate of more than 50 million. Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg will testify on April 10 and 11 to Congress.In an indictment in February, Robert Mueller, the special counsel investigating possible Russian meddling in the 2016 U.S. presidential campaign, charged IRA and 13 Russians with conspiring to interfere in U.S. politics and elections. Moscow denies tampering in U.S. elections and President Trump denies any coordination between his campaign and Russian officials.Among the issues investigators on the U.S. Senate Intelligence Committee and Democrats on the House Intelligence Committee are digging into are whether IRA and other Russian organizations used any Facebook data, the sources said, speaking on condition of anonymity. Also, whether the use of such data had any impact on the U.S. election, and how much Facebook data may have been acquired by Russian entities, the sources said.Zuckerberg last month disclosed that in 2013, Cambridge University academic Aleksandr Kogan, who ran a company called Global Science Research (GSR), created a personality quiz app that was installed by about 300,000 Facebook users.Zuckerberg said that because of the way the Facebook platform worked at the time, this gave Kogan access to data of "tens of millions" of friends of users who took the quiz.On Wednesday, Mike Schroepfer, Facebook's Chief Technology Officer, acknowledged in a public posting that "the Facebook information of up to 87 million people - mostly in the US - may have been improperly shared" with Cambridge Analytica.Zuckerberg said Facebook learned in 2015 that Kogan shared data from his app with Cambridge Analytica. The London-based consulting firm received millions of dollars from the Trump campaign and a political action committee supported by financier Robert Mercer, who supported Trump. Zuckerberg said Kogan "misused" Facebook's data.Cambridge Analytica said in a statement on Wednesday that it "did not use any" data it acquired from Kogan's company in work related to the 2016 U.S. presidential campaign. The firm added that it took legal action against GSR, and that it "immediately deleted the raw data" from its server when it learned from Facebook that the data had been "improperly obtained."Representative Adam Schiff, the House intelligence committee's top Democrat, sent Kogan a letter requesting correspondence and message traffic on his dealings with Cambridge Analytica and former Trump adviser Steve Bannon, any material related to Russia, and that Kogan agree to an interview.Kogan said in an email to Reuters that he knows nothing about Facebook data being obtained by Russia and had never heard of the Internet Research Agency "until a few weeks ago."(Reporting By Mark Hosenball; editing by John Walcott and Grant McCool)NEW YORK —  Facebook Inc Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg plans to testify before U.S. Congress, a source briefed on the matter said on Tuesday, as he bows to pressure from lawmakers insisting he explain how 50 million users' data ended up in the hands of a political consultancy.Lawmakers in the United States and Europe are demanding to know more about the company's privacy practices after a whistleblower said consultancy Cambridge Analytica improperly accessed data to target U.S. and British voters in close-run elections.Facebook said the company had received invitations to testify before Congress and that they were talking to legislators.Facebook shares closed down 4.9 percent on Tuesday and have fallen almost 18 percent since March 16, when Facebook first acknowledged that user data had been improperly channelled to Cambridge Analytica, which was hired by Donald Trump's 2016 presidential campaign.The tech sector is down 5.2 percent for March and on track for its worst month since April 2016. The data breach has raised investor concerns that any failure by big tech companies to protect privacy could deter advertisers and lead to tougher regulation.House Energy and Commerce Committee spokeswoman Elena Hernandez said "The committee is continuing to work with Facebook to determine a day and time for Mr. Zuckerberg to testify".On the same day, Zuckerberg turned down British lawmakers' invitations to explain to a British parliamentary committee what went wrong.The company said it would instead send one of his deputies, suggesting that Chief Technology Officer Mike Schroepfer or Chief Product Officer Chris Cox had the expertise to answer questions on the complex subject.The head of the committee called Zuckerberg's decision "astonishing" and urged him to think again.Christopher Wylie, the whistleblower who once worked at Cambridge Analytica, said on Monday that Canadian company AggregateIQ had developed the software that used the algorithms from the Facebook data to target Republican voters in the 2016 U.S. election.AggregateIQ did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Wylie's remarks. Cambridge Analytica said it had not shared any of the Facebook profile data with AggregateIQ.Cambridge Analytica has said it did not use Facebook data in Trump's campaign, and that it had deleted all Facebook data it obtained from a third-party app in 2014 after learning the information did not adhere to data protection rules.In full-page advertisements in British and U.S. newspapers this week Zuckerberg said the app built by a university researcher "leaked Facebook data of millions of people in 2014".He apologised last week for the mistakes the company had made and promised to restrict developers' access to user information as part of a plan to protect privacy.The U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee said on Monday it had invited Zuckerberg, as well as the CEOs of Alphabet Inc and Twitter Inc to testify at an April 10 hearing on data privacy.The U.S. House Energy and Commerce Committee and U.S. Senate Commerce Committee had already formally asked Zuckerberg to appear at a congressional hearing.The U.S. Federal Trade Commission took the unusual step of announcing on Monday that it had opened an investigation into the company - which it generally only does in cases of great public interest - citing media reports that raise what it called "substantial concerns about the privacy practices of Facebook."(Writing by Susan Thomas; Editing by James Dalgleish)SYDNEY —  Australian authorities say they are investigating whether Facebook breached the country's privacy law when personal information of more than 300,000 Australian users was obtained by Cambridge Analytica, a Trump-linked political consulting firm, without their authorization.Privacy Commissioner Angelene Falk said Thursday that the Privacy Act requires all organizations to ensure personal information is held securely. Customers must also be adequately notified about the collection and handling of personal information.Each breach of the Privacy Act can involve a 420,000 Australian dollar fine ($323,000). The privacy commissioner can also seek a court injunction and require offenders to pledge, under threat of further court action, to prevent further breaches.Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg will testify before Congress next week. His appearance comes as authorities around the world investigate allegations that the political data-mining firm Cambridge Analytica inappropriately accessed data on as many as 87 million Facebook users to influence elections.Here's a look at the various investigations and requests for information.___IN THE UNITED STATES:— CONGRESS: Zuckerberg is set to testify April 10 in a joint hearing of the Senate Commerce and Judiciary Committees and April 11 before the House Energy and Commerce Committee. This will be his first-ever testimony before Congress. Individual congressional members have also written Facebook seeking answers.— FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION: Tom Pahl, acting director of the FTC's Bureau of Consumer Protection, says the agency's probe will include whether the company engaged in "unfair acts" that cause "substantial injury" to consumers. Facebook reached a settlement with the FTC in 2011 offering privacy assurances, though the FTC's probe may extend to Facebook's compliance with U.S.-EU principles for transferring data.— INDIVIDUAL STATES: The attorneys general for 37 U.S. states and territories have written a letter seeking details on how Facebook monitored what app developers did with data collected on Facebook users and whether Facebook had safeguards to prevent misuse.___IN EUROPE:— EUROPEAN UNION: The EU is contacting data protection authorities in its member nations and in the United States to better follow up investigations into whether Facebook breached EU privacy laws.— U.K. INFORMATION COMMISSION: Britain's information regulator has seized evidence from the London office of Cambridge Analytica. Information Commissioner Elizabeth Denham has said the prime allegation against Cambridge Analytica is that it acquired personal data in an unauthorized way.— U.K. PARLIAMENT: The U.K. parliamentary media committee has summoned Zuckerberg to testify. The chairman, Damian Collins, says his panel has repeatedly asked Facebook how it uses data. He says Facebook officials "have been misleading to the committee."___ELSEWHERE:— AUSTRALIA: Australian authorities say they are investigating whether Facebook breached the country's privacy law, which requires organizations to ensure personal information is held securely.— INDIA: India's government has sent a notice to Facebook asking whether the personal data of Indian users has been compromised.LONDON —  Brexit donor Arron Banks said on Thursday Britain's data watchdog has joined the "wild unicorn chasing pack" of supporters wanting to remain in the European Union.Banks said he was asked to provide information as part of the Information Commissioner's investigation into whether data analytics were used to sway public opinion during the 2016 referendum on whether to leave the European Union.The Information Commissioner "appears to have joined the 'wild unicorn' chasing pack of 'Remainers' ..," Banks said in a statement.The watchdog is investigating the work of the political consultancy Cambridge Analytica and whether the company misled the public about work it did for a pro-Brexit group run by Banks before the vote to leave the EU.(Reporting By Andrew MacAskill; editing by Stephen Addison)NEW YORK —  The CEO of Facebook is defending its advertising-supported business model.Mark Zuckerberg's defense comes after Apple CEO Tim Cook said his company wouldn't be in Facebook's situation because Apple doesn't sell ads based on customer data the way Facebook does. Zuckerberg responded Monday that an advertising-supported business model is the only way that the service can survive because not everyone would be able to pay for Facebook if it charged a fee.He says the idea that Facebook doesn't care about its customers is "extremely glib."Facebook is facing scrutiny over its data collection following allegations that political consulting firm Cambridge Analytica obtained data on tens of millions of Facebook users to try to influence elections.Zuckerberg spoke with Vox , while Cook talked with Recode last week.NEW YORK —  The Latest on Facebook's privacy scandal (all times local):8:35 p.m.Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg has agreed to testify in a second congressional hearing next week, this time in the Senate.Zuckerberg will appear at a rare joint hearing of the Senate Judiciary and Commerce Committees on April 10.Earlier Wednesday, the House Energy and Commerce Committee announced that Zuckerberg would be testifying at a hearing on April 11.Lawmakers have called for Zuckerberg to appear personally after revelations that Cambridge Analytica, a Trump-linked political consulting firm, obtained data of tens of millions of users without their permission with the intent of swaying elections. The company has also been under scrutiny after Russians used Facebook and other social media to meddle in the 2016 elections.Zuckerberg will be the only witness at the hearing.___5:15 p.m.Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg says fixing the company's problems will take many years.In a conference call with reporters Wednesday, Zuckerberg said he wishes he could snap his fingers and solve everything in three to six months. But, he said, "these are big issues" and a big shift for Facebook.That says, he says the company will have "turned a corner" on a lot of these issues by the end of the year.Zuckerberg has set fixing Facebook as his personal challenge for 2018.The issues Facebook needs to address go beyond the privacy scandal involving Trump-affiliated consulting firm Cambridge Analytica. Facebook also has been dealing with fake news, the use of Facebook to spread hate and discord and concerns about social media's effect on people's mental well-being.___4:20 p.m.Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg is admitting to mistakes and says his company hasn't taken a broad enough view of what its responsibility is in the world.In a call with media on Wednesday, Zuckerberg calls this a "huge mistake" and added, "it's my mistake."Referring to the Cambridge Analytica privacy scandal, he said that it isn't enough for Facebook to believe app developers when they say they follow the rules. He says Facebook has to ensure they do.Earlier in the day, Facebook revealed that as many as 87 million people might have had their data accessed by Cambridge Analytica — an increase from the 50 million disclosed in published reports.___2:45 p.m.Facebook is restricting the user data it allows outsiders to access as part of steps it's taking to address the fallout from its worst privacy crisis in years.The company is reeling from news that a Trump-affiliated data-mining firm used ill-gotten data from millions of users to try to influence elections. Facebook says as many as 87 million people may have had their data accessed — an increase from the 50 million disclosed in published reports.Among the latest changes: Facebook is restricting access that apps can get about users' events, as well as information about groups such as member lists and content.In addition, the company is also removing the option to search for users by entering a phone number or an email address. While this helped individuals find friends who may have a common name, Facebook says businesses that had phone or email information on customers were able to collect profile information this way.___2:30 p.m.Facebook says as many as 87 million people may have had their data accessed in the Cambridge Analytica scandal — an increase from the 50 million disclosed in published reports.Cambridge Analytica, a data-mining firm affiliated with President Donald Trump's campaign, has been accused of using ill-gotten data from Facebook users to try to influence elections.This coming Monday, all Facebook users will receive a notice on their Facebook feeds with a link to see what apps they use and what information they have shared with those apps. They'll have a chance to delete apps they no longer want.Users who had their data shared with Cambridge Analytica will be told of that within that notice. Facebook says most of the affected users are in the U.S.___12:30 p.m.Now that Mark Zuckerberg is set to testify before Congress, he'll need advice not just from lawyers but from communications specialists, too, on addressing Facebook's privacy scandal.Public-relations experts who have prepped CEOs before say that congressional hearings are more political theater than public policy. The so-called "optics" — how things look — are as important as what you say.Other advice for the Facebook CEO? Appear sympathetic and be ready for a beating. Take responsibility. Don't feign ignorance.The stakes are high for Zuckerberg's April 11 appearance before the House Energy and Commerce Committee.___NoonFacebook's new privacy policy aims to explain the data it gathers on users more clearly — but doesn't actually change what it collects and shares.The company unveiled the revisions Wednesday as it faces one of its worst privacy scandals in history. Although Facebook says the changes aren't prompted by recent events, it's an opportune time. CEO Mark Zuckerberg is also set to testify before Congress next week for the first time.Among Wednesday's changes: Facebook has added a section explaining that it collects people's contact information, which may include call logs and text histories. The previous policy did not mention call logs or text histories. Several users were surprised to learn recently that Facebook had been collecting such data.___8:30 a.m.The leaders of a House oversight committee say Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg will testify before the panel on April 11.In an announcement Wednesday, Reps. Greg Walden and Frank Pallone say the hearing will focus on the Facebook's "use and protection of user data." Facebook is facing scrutiny over its data collection following allegations that the political consulting firm Cambridge Analytica obtained data on tens of millions of Facebook users to try to influence elections.Walden, R-Ore., is the House Energy and Commerce committee's chairman. Pallone of New Jersey is the panel's top ranking Democrat. They say the hearing will be "an important opportunity to shed light on critical consumer data privacy issues and help all Americans better understand what happens to their personal information online."SYDNEY —  Australia on Thursday said it had begun an investigation to decide whether social media giant Facebook Inc breached its privacy laws, after the company confirmed data from 300,000 Australian users may have been used without authorization.Personal information of up to 87 million users, mostly in the United States, may have been improperly shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, Facebook said on Wednesday, exceeding a media estimate of more than 50 million.In a statement, Australia's privacy commissioner, Angelene Falk, said her office would "confer with regulatory authorities internationally", given the global nature of the matter.A Facebook spokeswoman in Australia said the company would be "fully responsive" to the investigation and had recently updated some privacy settings.Facebook's chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, told reporters during a conference call that he accepted blame for the data leak.Zuckerberg is due to testify about the matter next week during two U.S. congressional hearings, and the data breach has drawn criticism from lawmakers and regulators around the world.London-based Cambridge Analytica, which has counted U.S. President Donald Trump's 2016 campaign among its clients, disputed Facebook's estimate of affected users.It said in a tweet on Wednesday that it received no more than 30 million records from a researcher it hired to collect data about people on Facebook.Australia's investigation follows comments by New Zealand's privacy commissioner last week that Facebook had broken laws in that country, a charge the company called disappointing.Australia's competition regulator is already investigating whether Facebook and Alphabet Inc's Google had disrupted the news media to the detriment of publishers and consumers.(Reporting by Tom Westbrook; Editing by Michael Perry and Clarence Fernandez)NEW YORK —  Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg prepares to face Congress on Tuesday, and No. 2 executive Sheryl Sandberg is on a media blitz as the company tries to contain swirling concerns about how it protects the data of its 2.2 billion members.Facing its most serious challenge in its 14-year-history, the social media juggernaut is seeking to maintain people's trust and avoid a user exodus.Here's a look at the scandal and what it means.___HOW DID THIS START?In mid-March, news broke that Cambridge Analytica, a London-based data-mining firm with ties to U.S. President Donald Trump, lifted the Facebook profiles of tens of millions of users without their permission in an attempt to sway elections.A former Cambridge Analytica employee, Christopher Wylie, said the firm got Facebook information through an app in order to build psychological profiles on a large portion of the U.S. electorate. That app vacuumed up information from users who gave the app permission to access their accounts — as well as additional data from their Facebook friends. About 270,000 people were paid to take part; tens of millions of their friends were also caught in the data dragnet.___WHY ARE PEOPLE MAD AT FACEBOOK?The crisis appears to have crystallized the anxiety many people feel about Facebook's enormous sway over daily life and its massive data trove.It comes on the heels of a revelation that Russia used the service to meddle in U.S. elections. It has also deepened concerns about the social media network's ability to avoid being exploited to spread propaganda and sway elections.And it has renewed questions about Facebook's ability to protect the privacy of its users while also exploiting their personal details to fuel its lucrative advertising business.Facebook's stock has fallen about 14 percent since the Cambridge Analytica story broke, more than the rest of the stock market has fallen . Some advertisers and users have left Facebook, although the company has said it hasn't been a significant number yet.___WHAT'S THE SCOPE OF THIS SCANDAL?The number of people affected seems to keep ballooning. On Wednesday, Facebook said that as many as 87 million people might have had their data accessed — up from the 50 million disclosed in previously published reports.And Facebook said it believes most of its 2.2 billion users have had their public profile information scraped by "malicious actors" at some point. That's through a feature that lets people search for users through their email address or phone number. While this helped individuals find friends, Facebook says malicious actors have also used this technique. Outside experts believe they could have been identity thieves, scam artists or shady data brokers assembling marketing profiles.On top of that, some users who logged in to Facebook through Android devices discovered that Facebook had been collecting phone call logs and text histories.___HOW HAS FACEBOOK RESPONDED?Zuckerberg and Sandberg were silent for five days following the initial report. Zuckerberg also was criticized for initially failing to apologize when he did break the silence.Since then, they've been on a major offensive, apologizing on national TV and rolling out new privacy policies. In a call with reporters Wednesday, Zuckerberg acknowledged he made a "huge mistake" in failing to take a broad enough view of what Facebook's responsibility is in the world.___IS FACEBOOK CHANGING ITS PRACTICES?Facebook has outlined a new privacy policy that aims to explain the data it gathers on users more clearly. It's also restricting access that apps can have to data about users' events, as well as information about groups such as member lists and content. In addition, the company is removing the option to search for users by entering a phone number or an email address.Facebook is trying to be more upfront with users. On Monday, all Facebook users will receive a notice on their Facebook feeds with a link to see what apps they use and what information they have shared with those apps. They'll have a chance to delete apps they no longer want. Users who might have had their data shared with Cambridge Analytica will be told of that.___WHY IS WASHINGTON INVOLVED?Congress has been interested in increasing regulation on Facebook due to its size and the myriad of issues it's facing. That includes data privacy, fake news and Russian meddling in the U.S. elections.Zuckerberg is set to testify on the privacy scandal Tuesday before a joint hearing of the Senate Commerce and Judiciary Committees, and a day later before the House Energy and Commerce Committee. The two sessions will be his first testimony before Congress. Separately, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission and various authorities in Europe are investigating.Meanwhile, special counsel Robert Mueller is scrutinizing the connections between Trump's campaign and Cambridge Analytica so he'll be interested in whatever Zuckerberg has to say, too.___AP Business Writers Alexandra Olson and Barbara Ortutay in New York contributed to this report.LONDON —  Facebook is co-operating with Britain's Information Commissioner's Office (ICO) as it examines how 30 organizations have used personal data, but the ICO said on Thursday it was too early to say whether the social media giant had done enough.On Wednesday, Facebook said the personal information of up to 87 million users, mostly in the United States, may have been improperly shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, more than previous estimates.The ICO said it was looking at how data was collected from a third party app on Facebook and shared with Cambridge Analytica, as well as a broader investigation into how social media platforms have been used in political campaigning."Facebook has been co-operating with us and, while I am pleased with the changes they are making, it is too early to say whether they are sufficient under the law," the information commissioner, Elizabeth Denham, said in a statement."As part of my investigation into the use of personal data and analytics by political campaigns, parties, social media companies and other commercial actors, the ICO is investigating 30 organizations, including Facebook."Britain's digital and media minister Matt Hancock said he would meet Facebook next week to discuss the scandal. Facebook shares are down over 10 percent since it first disclosed the leak."I expect Facebook to explain why they put the data of over a million of our citizens at risk," Hancock said in a tweet."This is completely unacceptable, and they must demonstrate this won't happen again."(Reporting by Alistair Smout; editing by Stephen Addison)Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg will testify before Congress next week, while an EU official plans to speak with Facebook's No. 2 executive, Sheryl Sandberg, over the company's data practices.Authorities around the world are investigating allegations that the political data-mining firm Cambridge Analytica inappropriately accessed data on as many as 87 million Facebook users to influence elections.Here's a look at the various investigations and requests for information.___IN THE UNITED STATES:— CONGRESS: Zuckerberg is set to testify April 10 in a joint hearing of the Senate Commerce and Judiciary Committees and April 11 before the House Energy and Commerce Committee. This will be his first-ever testimony before Congress. Individual congressional members have also written Facebook seeking answers.— FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION: Tom Pahl, acting director of the FTC's Bureau of Consumer Protection, says the agency's probe will include whether the company engaged in "unfair acts" that cause "substantial injury" to consumers. Facebook reached a settlement with the FTC in 2011 offering privacy assurances, though the FTC's probe may extend to Facebook's compliance with U.S.-EU principles for transferring data.— INDIVIDUAL STATES: The attorneys general for 37 U.S. states and territories have written a letter seeking details on how Facebook monitored what app developers did with data collected on Facebook users and whether Facebook had safeguards to prevent misuse.___IN EUROPE:— EUROPEAN UNION: The EU is contacting data protection authorities in its member nations and in the United States to better follow up investigations into whether Facebook breached EU privacy laws. EU spokesman Christian Wigand says EU Justice Commissioner Vera Jourova will have a telephone call next week with Sandberg.— U.K. INFORMATION COMMISSION: Britain's information regulator has seized evidence from the London office of Cambridge Analytica. Information Commissioner Elizabeth Denham has said the prime allegation against Cambridge Analytica is that it acquired personal data in an unauthorized way.— U.K. PARLIAMENT: The U.K. parliamentary media committee has summoned Zuckerberg to testify. The chairman, Damian Collins, says his panel has repeatedly asked Facebook how it uses data. He says Facebook officials "have been misleading to the committee."— ITALY: Italy's competition authority has opened an investigation. Authority chairman Giovanni Pitruzzella told Sky News24 that the investigation will focus on Facebook's claims on its home page that the service is free, without revealing that it makes money off users' data.___ELSEWHERE:— AUSTRALIA: Australian authorities say they are investigating whether Facebook breached the country's privacy law, which requires organizations to ensure personal information is held securely.— INDIA: India's government has sent a notice to Facebook asking whether the personal data of Indian users has been compromised.— INDONESIA: The Ministry of Communications and Information Technology says it has asked the National Police to investigate possible violations.WELLINGTON —  New Zealand's privacy commissioner joined international criticism against Facebook Inc, saying on Wednesday it has broken the law by declining a citizen access to personal information held on the accounts of other users.In a statement, the commissioner said that after being notified of its complaint, Facebook responded that it did not have to comply with the body's demand for the information.The commissioner "considers it necessary to publicly identify Facebook in order to highlight its demonstrated unwillingness to comply with the law, and to inform the New Zealand public of Facebook's position," the statement said.The commissioner's statement said "the social media company said the Privacy Act did not apply to it and it did not have to comply with the Commissioner's request to review the information requested by the complainant."The commissioner said its powers beyond demanding information were limited.A spokeswoman for Facebook said the company had investigated the complaint but had not been provided enough detail to fully resolve it."We are disappointed that the New Zealand Privacy Commissioner asked us to provide access to a year's worth of private data belonging to several people and then criticized us for protecting their privacy," she said."We scrutinize all requests to disclose personal data, particularly the contents of private messages, and will challenge those that are overly broad...Instead the Commissioner has made a broad and intrusive request for private data."Facebook has come into spotlight over the past week over its handling of data from millions of users.Lawmakers in the United States and Europe are demanding to know more about the company's privacy practices after a whistleblower said consultancy Cambridge Analytica improperly accessed data to target U.S. and British voters in elections.Cambridge Analytica has said it did not use Facebook data in U.S. President Donald Trump's campaign, and that it had deleted all Facebook data it obtained from a third-party app in 2014 after learning the information did not adhere to data protection rules.(Reporting by Marius Zaharia in WELLINGTON. Additional reporting by Melanie Burton in MELBOURNE; Editing by Richard Borsuk and Michael Perry)(Reuters) - Facebook Inc is giving users more control over their privacy by making data management easier and redesigning the settings menu, the company said on Wednesday, in the wake of a scandal over a breach that exposed the personal information of millions and was allegedly used by a political consultancy.The company also said it would propose in the coming weeks updates to the social media website's terms of service and data policy to better spell out what information it collects and how it uses it.The company has faced a global outcry after a whistleblower said that data from millions of users was improperly harvested by consultancy Cambridge Analytica to target U.S. and British voters in close-run elections.Facebook shares are down nearly 18 percent since March 16, when it first acknowledged that user data had been improperly channeled to Cambridge Analytica, eating away nearly $100 billion of the company's market value."We've heard loud and clear that privacy settings and other important tools are too hard to find, and that we must do more to keep people informed," Erin Egan, Facebook's chief privacy officer, and Ashlie Beringer, its deputy general counsel, said in a statement.In addition to redesigning its settings menu on mobile devices, Facebook said it is creating a new privacy shortcut menu where users would be able to better secure their accounts and control personal information. It would also allow users to review and delete data they have shared, including posts and search queries.Users would be able to download the data shared with Facebook, including uploaded photos, contacts added to their account, and posts on timelines.(Reporting by Philip George and Ismail Shakil in Bengaluru; Editing by Bernard Orr)(Reuters) - A civil rights group and some consumer groups said on Friday they would file a complaint with the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) alleging that Facebook Inc's use of facial recognition techniques threaten users' privacy.The social media company has come under fire after it was disclosed that political consulting firm Cambridge Analytica, which worked for Donald Trump's presidential campaign, gained access to the personal data of up to 87 million Facebook users.Facial recognition techniques are used by Facebook to help users tag their friends in photos on the social media platform."The scanning of facial images without express, affirmative consent is unlawful and must be enjoined," Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC) said. (https://bit.ly/2GXGWQF)People can choose whether or not to allow this technology and they can change their mind at any time. When someone has their setting turned off, we don't use this technology to identify them in photos, Facebook Deputy Chief Privacy Officer Rob Sherman said.In 2011, Facebook had settled privacy-related charges with the FTC, which were brought about by EPIC's complaints. (https://bit.ly/1U44BfY)EPIC and the consumer groups said on Friday that Facebook's use of facial recognition tools also violates terms of the 2011 settlement.(Reporting by Muvija M in Bengaluru; Editing by Shounak Dasgupta)NEW YORK —  The Latest on Facebook's privacy scandal (all times local):2:30 p.m.Facebook has been secretly deleting some messages CEO Mark Zuckerberg sent through its Messenger application, an option that hasn't been available to most of the social network's 2.2 billion users.The company says it has been removing Zuckerberg's messages from the inboxes of various people for several years. The recipients of Zuckerberg's messages weren't informed before that happened. Facebook is making the acknowledgement Friday after TechCrunch first reported the tactic.Facebook says it began erasing the messages of Zuckerberg and a few other top executives in 2014 after computer hackers obtained and released emails from Sony Pictures executives. The Sony messages included disparaging remarks about movie stars and other people in the entertainment industry.Although the ability to automatically delete sent texts hadn't been previously available, Facebook says it now plans to make it available to all users. The company apologized for not doing so sooner.The development comes as Facebook faces questions about trust in light of one of its worst privacy scandals in its 14-year history.___2 p.m.Facebook says it will require advertisers who want to run either political ads or so-called "issue ads" —which may not endorse a specific candidate or party but which discuss political topics— to verify themselves.Facebook is working to strengthen its system ahead of this year's U.S. midterm elections and other elections around the world. The company has already required political ads to verify who is paying for them and where the advertiser is located. The requirement for issue ads is new.In addition, Facebook says it will also require the administrators of pages with a "large number" of followers to verify their identities and addresses. The company did not specify what number of followers would trigger the requirement.The moves are intended to clamp down on fake pages and accounts such as those used to disrupt the 2016 presidential elections in the U.S. and elsewhere.___1:15 p.m.Facebook will begin alerting users whose private data may have been compromised in the Cambridge Analytica scandal starting Monday.All 2.2 billion Facebook users will receive a notice on their feeds titled "Protecting Your Information." It will have a link to information on which Facebook apps they use and what information they have shared with those apps.In addition, 87 million users whose data might have been shared with Cambridge Analytica will get a more detailed message informing them of that fact.The political data-mining firm allegedly used ill-gotten Facebook user data in its efforts to sway elections. Cambridge Analytica says it only ever received data on 30 million users.___9:40 a.m.Sheryl Sandberg says Facebook should have conducted an audit after learning that a political consultancy improperly accessed user data nearly three years ago.The company's chief operating officer told NBC's "Today" show that Facebook is now undertaking that audit. Sandberg said that at the time, Facebook received legal assurances that Cambridge Analytica had deleted the improperly obtained information.She says, "What we didn't do is the next step of an audit and we're trying to that now."The company is facing a global backlash over the improper data-sharing scandal. Hearings over the issue are scheduled in the U.S., and the European Union is considering what actions to take against the company.___6:45 a.m.The European Union says that Facebook has told it that up to 2.7 million people in the 28-nation bloc may have been victim of improper data sharing involving political data-mining firm Cambridge Analytica.EU spokesman Christian Wigand said Friday that EU Justice Commissioner Vera Jourova will have a telephone call with Facebook's chief operating officer, Sheryl Sandberg, early next week to address the massive data leaks.The EU and Facebook will be looking at what changes the social media giant needs to make to better protect users and how the U.S. company must adapt to new EU data protection rules.Wigand said that EU data protection authorities will discuss over the coming days "a strong coordinated approach" on how to deal with the Facebook investigation.___5 a.m.Civil society and rights groups in Myanmar say Facebook has failed to adequately act against online hate speech that incites violence against the country's Muslim minority.Phandeeyar, a digital innovation lab, and five other groups wrote an open letter to Facebook founder and CEO Mark Zuckerberg, challenging his contention in a recent interview that the social media platform had effectively combated hate speech targeting the Rohingya community that's being persecuted in western Myanmar.Htaike Htaike Aung, executive director of one of the groups, Myanmar ICT for Development Organization, says Facebook has been a useful tool for people in Myanmar to exercise freedom of expression, but it had failed to effectively enforce rules to make it a safe community for all.___4:15 a.m.Indonesia says Facebook is being investigated over the privacy breach of its Indonesian users.The Ministry of Communications and Information Technology says in a statement Friday it has asked the National Police to investigate possible violations of Indonesia's privacy law a day after Facebook announced that personal data of more than 1 million Indonesians might have been exposed by political consultant Cambridge Analytica.It says Facebook representatives in Indonesia could face up to 12 years in prison and a fine of $871,000, if convicted.The ministry has summoned the representatives late Thursday and asked Facebook to stop its applications that could allow third parties to get users' personal information.Facebook Indonesia Head of Public Policy Ruben Hattari says they will keep cooperating with the Indonesian government.LONDON —  The Latest on the Facebook privacy scandal (all times local):6:30 p.m.Britain's Information Commissioner says some 30 organizations — including Facebook — are being investigated to see how social media platforms were used in political campaigns.Information Commissioner Elizabeth Denham's statement Thursday comes a day after Facebook announced that tens of millions more people might have been exposed in the Cambridge Analytica privacy scandal than previously thought. In all, Facebook says as many as 87 million people might have had their data accessed.Denham says her office is "conducting a broader investigation into how social media platforms were used in political campaigning." She says the investigation could result in enforcement action.She says "Facebook has been co-operating with us and, while I am pleased with the changes they are making, it is too early to say whether they are sufficient under the law."___9:30 p.m. (Sydney time)The European Union is contacting data protection authorities in its member nations and in the United States to better follow up investigations into whether Facebook breached EU privacy laws when millions of people had their data accessed through a leak.EU spokesman Christian Wigand said on Thursday that the bloc's justice chief Vera Jourova would have "high-level contacts in the coming days" with Facebook officials and also reach out to data protection officials, including the British authority which is leading the European investigation.Facebook said Wednesday that as many as 87 million people might have had their data accessed."You can be sure that we will continue to follow these investigations by the relevant authorities closely," Wigand said.___4:30 p.m. (Sydney time)Australian authorities say they are investigating whether Facebook breached the country's privacy law when personal information of more than 300,000 Australian users was obtained by Cambridge Analytica, a Trump-linked political consulting firm, without their authorization.Privacy Commissioner Angelene Falk said Thursday that the Privacy Act requires all organizations to ensure personal information is held securely. Customers must also be adequately notified about the collection and handling of personal information.Each breach of the Privacy Act can involve a 420,000 Australian dollar fine ($323,000). The privacy commissioner can also seek a court injunction and require offenders to pledge, under threat of further court action, to prevent further breaches.JAKARTA —  Indonesia's communication ministry said it has asked Facebook Inc to confirm whether personal data from any of its citizens was shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica and is coordinating with police in case any laws were breached.Facebook said this week that the personal information of up to 87 million users may have been improperly shared with Cambridge Analytica.The social media giant has said most of the users appeared to be in the United States, but there have been reports that they included data from more than one million Indonesians."There is an indication that Indonesian Facebook users are part of Cambridge Analytica's data case. We are requesting an exact figure," Communications Minister Rudiantara said in a statement sent to Reuters by text message.The minister said he had also sought reassurances from Facebook that it was complying with an Indonesian government decree on private data protection and a law on electronic information and transactions.Breaches of the law can include criminal sanctions with a maximum penalty of up to 12 years in jail or a fine of 12 billion rupiah ($870,000).Asked for comment, Facebook said in an emailed statement: "We are strongly committed to protecting people's information, and we intend to make all the same privacy controls and settings available everywhere."The company had taken "significant steps to make our privacy tools easier to find, restrict data access on Facebook, and make our Terms and Data Policy clearer", it said.Facebook would "continue to work with privacy and information commissioners, and authorities, in Indonesia."The communications ministry said it was coordinating with Indonesia's National Police in case there was a need to take law enforcement action.National police spokesman Setyo Wasisto confirmed this.Indonesia had 69 million monthly active Facebook users as of the first quarter of 2014, ranking the country fourth globally after the United States, India and Brazil, company data showed.Indonesia threatened last year to block Facebook's WhatsApp Messenger, which is widely used in the country, unless obscene Graphics Interchange Format (GIF) images provided by third parties were removed.Facebook Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg said on Thursday that the social network had not seen any meaningful impact on usage or ad sales in the wake of a data privacy scandal.($1 = 13,775.0000 rupiah)(Reporting by Cindy Silviana; Additional reporting by Kanupriya Kapoor; Writing by Ed Davies; Editing by Christopher Cushing)SAN FRANCISCO —  Facebook Inc said on Thursday it had begun "fact-checking" photos and videos to reduce the hoaxes and false news stories that have plagued the world's largest social media network.Facebook has for months faced an uproar among users whose complaints range from the spread of fake news to the use of the network to manipulate elections and the harvesting of 50 million people's Facebook data by the political consultancy Cambridge Analytica.Manipulated photos and videos are another growing problem on social media.The fact-checking began on Wednesday in France with assistance from the news organization AFP and will soon expand to more countries and partners, Tessa Lyons, a product manager at Facebook, said in a briefing with reporters.Lyons did not say what criteria Facebook or AFP would use to evaluate photos and videos, or how much a photo could be edited or doctored before it is ruled fake.The project is part of "efforts to fight false news around elections," she said.A representative for AFP could not immediately be reached for comment.Shares of Facebook closed up 4.4 percent at $159.79 on Thursday after a tumultuous two weeks. It remained down more than 13 percent from March 16, when Facebook disclosed the Cambridge Analytica data leak and sparked fears of stricter regulation.Facebook has tried other ways to stem the spread of fake news. It has used third-party fact-checkers to identify them, and then given such stories less prominence in the Facebook News Feed when people share links to them.In January, Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said Facebook would prioritize "trustworthy" news by using member surveys to identify high-quality outlets.Samidh Chakrabarti, another Facebook product manager, said in the briefing that the company had begun to "proactively" look for election-related disinformation rather than waiting for reports from users, helping it to move more quickly.Alex Stamos, Facebook's chief security officer, said in the briefing that the company was concerned not only about false facts but also other kinds of fakery.He said Facebook wanted to reduce "fake audiences," which he described as using "tricks" to artificially expand the perception of support for a particular message, as well as "false narratives," such as headlines and language that "exploit disagreements."(Reporting by David Ingram; Editing by Richard Chang)NEW YORK —  Facebook's acknowledgement that most of its 2.2 billion members have probably had their personal data scraped by "malicious actors" is the latest example of the social network's failure to protect its users' data.Not to mention its apparent inability to even identify the problem until the company was already embroiled in scandal.CEO Mark Zuckerberg told reporters Wednesday that Facebook is shutting down a feature that let people search for Facebook users by phone number or email address. Although that was useful for people who wanted to find others on Facebook, it turns out that unscrupulous types also figured out years ago that they could use it to identify individuals and collect data off their profiles.The scrapers were at it long enough, Zuckerberg said, that "at some point during the last several years, someone has probably accessed your public information in this way."The only way to be safe would have been for users to deliberately turn off that search feature several years ago. Facebook had it turned on by default."I think Facebook has not been clear enough with how to use its privacy settings," said Jamie Winterton, director of strategy for Arizona State University's Global Security Initiative. "That, to me, was the failure."The breach was a stunning admission for a company already reeling from allegations that the political data-mining firm Cambridge Analytica inappropriately accessed data on as many as 87 million Facebook users to influence elections.Over the past few weeks, the scandal has mushroomed into investigations across continents, including a probe by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission. Zuckerberg himself will be questioned by Congress for the first time on Tuesday."The FTC looked the other way for years when consumer groups told them Facebook was violating its 2011 deal to better protect its users. But now the Cambridge Analytica scandal has awoken the FTC from its long digital privacy slumber," said Jeffrey Chester, executive director for the Washington-based privacy nonprofit Center for Digital Democracy.Neither Zuckerberg nor his company has identified those who carried out the data scraping. Outside experts believe they could have been identity thieves, scam artists or shady data brokers assembling marketing profiles.Zuckerberg said the company detected the problem in a data-privacy audit started after the Cambridge Analytica disclosures, but didn't say why the company hadn't noticed it — or fixed it — earlier.Facebook did not immediately respond to a request for comment Thursday on when it discovered the data scraping.In his call with reporters Wednesday, Zuckerberg said the company had tried "rate limiting" the searches. This restricted how many searches someone can conduct at one time from a particular IP address, a numeric designation that identifies a device's location on the internet. But Zuckerberg said the scrapers circumvented that defense by cycling through multiple IP addresses.The scraped information was limited to what a user had already chosen to make public — which, depending on a person's privacy settings, could be a lot — as well as what Facebook requires people to share. That includes full name, profile picture and listings of school or workplace networks.But hackers and scam artists could then use that information — and combine it with other data in circulation — to pull hoaxes on people, plant malware on their computers or commit other mischief.Having access to such a massive amount of data could also pose national security risks, Winterton said.A foreign entity could conceivably use such information to influence elections or stir up discord — exactly what Russia is alleged to have done, using Facebook and other social media, in the 2016 presidential elections.Privacy advocates have long been critical of Facebook's penchant for pushing people to share more and more information, often through pro-sharing default options.While the company offers detailed privacy controls — users can turn off ad targeting, for example, or face recognition, and post updates that no one else sees — many people never change their settings, and often don't even know how to.The company has tried to simplify its settings multiple times over the years, most recently this week.Winterton said that for individual Facebook users, worrying about this data scraping won't do much good — after all, the data is already out there. But she said it might be a good time to "reflect on what we are sharing and how we are sharing it and whether we need to.""Just because someone asks us information, it doesn't mean we have to give it to them if we are not comfortable," she said.She added that while she no longer has a Facebook account, when she did she put her birth year as 1912 and her hometown as Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Neither is true.__AP Technology Writer Anick Jesdanun contributed to this story.(Reuters) - Shares of Facebook Inc rose as much as 4.2 percent on Thursday after Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg said the social network had not seen any meaningful impact on usage or ad sales in the wake of a data privacy scandal.The company's shares have sunk 16 percent, wiping more than $80 billion from its market value since March 16, when the New York Times and London's Observer newspaper broke news of the use of its data by political consultancy Cambridge Analytica.Some investors see the chaos as a chance to snap up shares in a service for which there is scarce alternative, despite rising public scrutiny and the prospect of a grilling from U.S. legislators when Zuckerberg testifies before Congress next week.Canada's province of British Columbia and Canada's federal government combined investigations on Thursday, saying they had launched a joint probe into Facebook and Canadian data firm AggregateIQ, while Australian authorities said they were exploring whether the social media company had breached user privacy laws.The California State Teachers' Retirement System, with nearly $1 billion in Facebook stock as of last year, on Thursday also said it would question the company about privacy protections.Despite the probes and celebrities including singer Cher, actor Will Ferrell and Tesla Chief Elon Musk deleting their accounts, Facebook's social app downloads improved on a monthly basis both in the United States and globally, according to Evercore ISI.Facebook expanded its share of social app downloads in March by 33.2 percent from 30.1 percent, Evercore data showed.Several Wall Street analysts said the stock's decline presented a good opportunity to buy into the social network's previously high-flying shares, although they cautioned that much will depend on Zuckerberg's testimony to Congress."We suspect that looking back a year from now, if not sooner, this episode will have been a uniquely compelling buying opportunity in the mega-cap internet space," Deutsche Bank analysts said.Facebook's chief operating officer, Sheryl Sandberg, told Bloomberg in an interview on Thursday that a few advertisers had paused spending in the wake of the incident, but that the company was having reassuring conversations about how it has built privacy into its system. (https://bloom.bg/2q89KMt)Companies including U.S. auto parts retailer Pep Boys, internet company Mozilla and German bank Commerzbank AG have suspended advertisement on the platform.Sandberg also said a tool that allowed a researcher to gain access to personal information of up to 87 million users, complied with a privacy agreement the company signed with the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) in 2011.Her comments followed reports that the FTC was investigating the company over a possible violation of that agreement, which demands it to get user consent before sharing their information."While it's clear that investor sentiment has been materially impacted by (the) Cambridge Analytica revelations, we believe FB is acting proactively and aggressively to tighten its privacy controls and increase the level of transparency into its practices," Wells Fargo analyst Ken Sena said.Zuckerberg, who will testify about the scandal next week in front of committees in the U.S. House and Senate, may face calls from legislators for more oversight.Sandberg, in a separate interview with PBS, said: "We're not just open to regulations, we're moving ahead of it," and had built a tool which would be live before the next U.S. election and which would show details of who paid for election ads and demographics of the audience.Facebook shares closed up 2.7 percent at $159.35.(Reporting by Supantha Mukherjee, Sonam Rai and Arjun Panchadar in Bengaluru; Mohammad Zargham in Washington; editing by Peter Henderson, Bernard Orr and James Dalgleish)___Workers benefit as US businesses struggle to fill jobsWASHINGTON (AP) — More American employers are struggling to find enough workers to fill jobs, which might have contributed to slower hiring last month. And workers are benefiting in the meantime: More people who had given up looking for work are renewing their job hunts, more employees are confident enough to quit to look for other jobs and pay is gradually picking up. U.S. employers added just 103,000 jobs in March, the Labor Department said Friday, the fewest in six months.___Powell says Fed expects to stick with gradual rate hikesCHICAGO (AP) — Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell on Friday painted a mostly sunny view of the U.S. economy and said the Fed remains committed to raising its key interest rate gradually unless events change. He said it was too soon to determine how a trade fight with China could affect the U.S. economy.___Stocks dive as US proposes more China tariffs; Dow falls 572NEW YORK (AP) — Stocks ended the week the way they began it: tumbling as investors worry that tariffs and harsh words between the U.S. and China will touch off a trade war that derails the global economy. That came with the U.S. considering duties on an additional $100 billion in goods imported from China.___China vows to 'counterattack' US as trade spat worsensWASHINGTON (AP) — China vows to 'counterattack with great strength' if President Donald Trump hikes tariffs on an additional $100 billion in tariffs on Chinese goods in an escalating trade dispute between the world's two largest economies. Trump's surprise directive for the U.S. trade representative to consider more tariffs came a day after Beijing announced planned increases in duties on U.S. soybeans, aircraft and other items in response to American tariffs on $50 billion in Chinese imports.___Did Cambridge Analytica get your data? You'll know soonNEW YORK (AP) — Facebook will begin alerting users whose private data may have been compromised in the Cambridge Analytica scandal starting Monday. All 2.2 billion Facebook users will receive a notice with a link to information on which Facebook apps they use and what information they have shared with those apps. In addition, 87 million users whose data might have been shared with Cambridge Analytica will get a more detailed message informing them of that fact.___Nine West files for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protectionNEW YORK (AP) — Nine West Holdings Inc. has become the latest retailer to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in an attempt to restructure its debt. The shoe chain says the move was made to help with the sale of its Nine West and Bandolino footwear and handbag business and so it can focus more on its profitable businesses, which include One Jeanswear Group, The Jewelry Group, the Kasper Group and Anne Klein.___Boss buzzing you after hours? NYC might let you say buzz offNEW YORK (AP) — Technology that offered the promise of freedom from the confines of an office has instead become a ball and chain in its own right, blurring the lines between work hours and well, any other hours. A New York City Council member wants to put a stop to that with a proposal that would bar employers from requiring employees to check and respond to non-emergency electronic communications sent outside of regular work hours.___US consumer debt rose a slight 3.3 percent in FebruaryWASHINGTON (AP) — US consumers increased their debt by just 3.3 percent in February, the weakest monthly change in nearly seven years despite an otherwise healthy economy. The Federal Reserve said Friday that consumer borrowing rose $10.6 billion in March to nearly $3.9 trillion. The gains have slowed sharply from a 10.3 percent jump in debt levels in November. February's increase was the smallest since August 2011, when consumer credit levels declined.___Foreign worker saves 7 lives as Hawaii fishing boat sinksHONOLULU (AP) — A federal contractor who was aboard the fishing vessel Princess Hawaii when it sank off the Big Island credits a Vietnamese crewman with saving his life. Khanh Huynh was acting as the de facto captain of the doomed fishing boat. The 28-year-old fisherman is one of hundreds of foreigners who work aboard American-owned fishing vessels in Hawaii. The workers lack visas and live on the boats for the duration of their contracts — often for years at a time.___The Standard & Poor's 500 lost 58.37 points, or 2.2 percent, to 2,604.47. The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 572.46 points, or 2.3 percent, to 23,932.76. The Nasdaq composite slid 161.44 points, or 2.3 percent, to 6,915.11. The Russell 2000 index of smaller-company stocks dipped 29.63 points, or 1.9 percent, to 1,513.30.Benchmark U.S. crude dropped $1.48, or 2.3 percent, to $62.06 a barrel in New York while Brent crude, used to price international oils, lost $1.22, or 1.8 percent, to $67.11 per barrel in London. In other energy trading, wholesale gasoline dipped 3 cents to $1.95 a gallon. Heating oil lost 2 cents to $1.96 a gallon. Natural gas rose 3 cents to $2.70 per 1,000 cubic feet.NAIROBI/LAGOS —  In Kenya, which has a large and fast growing population of internet users, there are no specific laws or regulations to protect the privacy of those individuals.Kenya is not alone in Africa, which as a region has clocked the world's fastest growth in internet use over the past decade. Unlike in Europe and the United States, where data-privacy laws provide a level of protection to consumers, many Africans have little or no recourse if a data breach occurs because often legal and regulatory safeguards don't exist.Recent revelations about British analytics firm Cambridge Analytica, which Facebook says improperly accessed personal data of about 50 million of the social networks users in the 2016 U.S. presidential election, have also touched the African continent.Cambridge Analytica or its parent company SCL Group worked on the 2013 and 2017 campaigns of Kenya’s President Uhuru Kenyatta. The company was also hired to support the failed re-election bid of then-president Goodluck Jonathan of Nigeria in 2015, according to Britain’s Guardian newspaper.A spokesman for the Nigerian president said on Monday that the country's government will investigate allegations of improper involvement by Cambridge Analytica in the 2007 and 2015 elections.Kenya’s ruling Jubilee party told Reuters that it had hired SCL for “branding” in the 2017 presidential election but did not elaborate on the precise nature of the work.Cambridge Analytica didn't respond to a request for comment. The company has suspended its chief executive pending what it said would be a full, independent investigation.LIMITED PROTECTIONGrowth of internet use in Africa, a continent of 1 billion people, has been fueled by rapidly expanding mobile broadband networks and ever more affordable phones.That presents a major growth opportunity for internet companies such as Facebook, which currently sees some 123 million people across sub-Saharan Africa accessing its social network platform monthly.While some governments on the continent have responded to these rapid changes - rights campaigners welcomed a data-protection law passed by South Africa 2013 - many have not.Privacy advocacy groups say that is leaving a lot of Africans, many of whom are accessing the internet for the first time, with little or no protection.More than half of Africa's 54 countries have no data protection or privacy laws, according to London-based rights group Article 19. And, of the 14 countries that do, nine have no regulators to enforce them, the group says.In Kenya, a country of 44 million people with some 8.5 million using Facebook on a monthly basis, specialists say no specific data-protection laws exist. The government has said it is drafting a data protection bill.But even some data-privacy bills that have been introduced in African parliaments have been held up for years.In Nigeria, the African country with the most internet users, a data-protection bill that was introduced in 2010 is still making its way through parliament.The proposed Nigerian legislation, which is being reviewed by the upper house of parliament, would prohibit the processing of data for purposes other than their original intended use and companies could be fined for breaches of personal information.But digital-rights campaigners question whether law enforcement agencies and the judiciary would be equipped to enforce the Nigerian legislation if it was passed. A spokesman for Nigeria’s communications ministry declined to comment.Data privacy groups say that many African governments have a vested interest in not introducing such laws because they use citizens’ data for their own ends – whether for political campaigns, as in Kenya, or for suppressing political dissent, as rights groups allege that the government in Tanzania has done since passing a cyber crime law in 2015.A spokesman for the Tanzanian government said that authorities issued new regulations last month that, among other things, prevent the national communications regulator from disclosing personal data of web users.PERSONAL DATAPrivacy advocates say another issue impacting data protection in Africa is that some companies, including Facebook, have introduced stripped-down versions of their own platforms and some other websites for no fee in exchange for users providing some data.From users of its Free Basics service, Facebook collects certain information such as when the service was accessed, what type of device they are using and the mobile operator used, according to the company's website. "We may also share such usage information with the providers of third-party services," Facebook said.Privacy advocacy groups say some Free Basics users, who may be getting online for the first time, may have little or no understanding of what information is being collected from them.Facebook, which says its Free Basics service is available in 27 African countries, said users can "choose to delete their information associated with their use of Free Basics, and may do so by contacting us."Though some Africans access the internet via a no-fee service like Facebook’s Free Basics, many of those who have the ability to pay for mobile phone data still use the platform more than any other site on the internet, said Nanjira Sambuli, who heads the World Wide Web Foundation’s office in Kenya.   "Facebook is the Internet for many people in Africa," Sambuli said.While specialists say public awareness about the importance of data protection in Africa is far less than in the United States and Europe, there are signs of growing concern.Phumzile van Damme, a South African politician from the opposition Democratic Alliance, has raised concerns about what she termed the "digital dark arts" being used to manipulate voters ahead of the country's elections scheduled for next year.Writing on Twitter on March 25, van Damme said she had been studying the lessons of the 2016 U.S. election and reading reports of the involvement of private firms including Cambridge Analytica in "manipulating" voters using their data in recent African elections.She said that she hoped South Africa's communications regulator had been doing the same."Regulation always lags behind technological developments," she said.For some, concerns about the amount of personal information Facebook collects are weighed against the access to others that the social network provides."Is it time to say goodbye to Facebook?" asked the headline of a column published last month by The Standard, a Kenyan daily. The columnist wrote that his concern over Facebook holding the “power” of its users’ data – from what a user does on the platform to his or her activities on linked apps and other sites - had led him to leave Facebook repeatedly over the last two years.But, he added: "My leaving has however never lasted more than a day."(Reporting by Maggie Fick and Alexis Akwagyiram; Additional reporting by Ed Cropley in Johannesburg, John Ndiso in Nairobi, Fumbuka Ng'wanakilala in Dar es Salaam; and Eric Auchard and Paul Sandle in London; Writing by Maggie Fick; Editing by Cassell Bryan-Low)(Reuters) - Shares of Facebook Inc rose as much as 4.2 percent on Thursday after Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg said the social network had not seen any meaningful impact on usage or ad sales in the wake of a data privacy scandal.The company's shares have sunk 16 percent, wiping more than $80 billion from its market value since March 16, when the New York Times and London's Observer newspaper broke news of the use of its data by political consultancy Cambridge Analytica.Some investors see the chaos as a chance to snap up shares in a service for which there is scarce alternative, despite rising public scrutiny and the prospect of a grilling from U.S. legislators when Zuckerberg testifies before Congress next week.Canada's province of British Columbia and Canada's federal government combined investigations on Thursday, saying they had launched a joint probe into Facebook and Canadian data firm AggregateIQ, while Australian authorities said they were exploring whether the social media company had breached user privacy laws.The California State Teachers' Retirement System, with nearly $1 billion in Facebook stock as of last year, on Thursday also said it would question the company about privacy protections.Despite the probes and celebrities including singer Cher, actor Will Ferrell and Tesla Chief Elon Musk deleting their accounts, Facebook's social app downloads improved on a monthly basis both in the United States and globally, according to Evercore ISI.Facebook expanded its share of social app downloads in March by 33.2 percent from 30.1 percent, Evercore data showed.Several Wall Street analysts said the stock's decline presented a good opportunity to buy into the social network's previously high-flying shares, although they cautioned that much will depend on Zuckerberg's testimony to Congress."We suspect that looking back a year from now, if not sooner, this episode will have been a uniquely compelling buying opportunity in the mega-cap internet space," Deutsche Bank analysts said.Facebook's chief operating officer, Sheryl Sandberg, told Bloomberg in an interview on Thursday that a few advertisers had paused spending in the wake of the incident, but that the company was having reassuring conversations about how it has built privacy into its system. (https://bloom.bg/2q89KMt)Companies including U.S. auto parts retailer Pep Boys, internet company Mozilla and German bank Commerzbank AG have suspended advertisement on the platform.Sandberg also said a tool that allowed a researcher to gain access to personal information of up to 87 million users, complied with a privacy agreement the company signed with the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) in 2011.Her comments followed reports that the FTC was investigating the company over a possible violation of that agreement, which demands it to get user consent before sharing their information."While it's clear that investor sentiment has been materially impacted by (the) Cambridge Analytica revelations, we believe FB is acting proactively and aggressively to tighten its privacy controls and increase the level of transparency into its practices," Wells Fargo analyst Ken Sena said.Zuckerberg, who will testify about the scandal next week in front of committees in the U.S. House and Senate, may face calls from legislators for more oversight.Sandberg, in a separate interview with PBS, said: "We're not just open to regulations, we're moving ahead of it," and had built a tool which would be live before the next U.S. election and which would show details of who paid for election ads and demographics of the audience.Facebook shares closed up 2.7 percent at $159.35.(Reporting by Supantha Mukherjee, Sonam Rai and Arjun Panchadar in Bengaluru; Mohammad Zargham in Washington; editing by Peter Henderson, Bernard Orr and James Dalgleish)(Reuters) - Facebook Inc said on Wednesday it would end its partnerships with several large data brokers who help advertisers target people on the social network, a step that follows a scandal over how Facebook handles personal information.The world's largest social media company is under pressure to improve its handling of data after disclosing that information about 50 million Facebook users wrongly ended up in the hands of political consultancy Cambridge Analytica.Facebook adjusted the privacy settings on its service on Wednesday, giving users control over their personal information in fewer taps.Facebook has for years given advertisers the option of targeting their ads based on data collected by companies such as Acxiom Corp and Experian PLC.The tool has been widely used among certain categories of advertisers - such as automakers, luxury goods producers and consumer packaged goods companies - who do not sell directly to consumers and have relatively little information about who their customers are, according to Facebook."While this is common industry practice, we believe this step, winding down over the next six months, will help improve people's privacy on Facebook," Graham Mudd, a Facebook product marketing director, said in a statement.Shares in Acxiom traded down more than 10 percent to $25 after Facebook's announcement after the bell. Shares in other data brokers were largely unchanged. A representative for Acxiom could not immediately be reached for comment.Facebook declined to comment on how the change could affect its ad revenue.Advertisers would still be able to use third-party data services to measure how well their ads performed by examining purchasing data, Facebook said.Facebook's website lists nine third-party data providers that it has worked with, including Acxiom, Experian, Oracle Data Cloud, TransUnion and WPP PLC.None of the companies could immediately be reached for comment.Facebook on Wednesday also put all its privacy settings on one page and made it easier to stop third-party apps from using personal information. Privacy settings had previously been spread over at least 20 screens, Facebook said.Facebook said in a blog post it had been working on the updates for some time but sped things up to appease users' anger over how the company uses data and as lawmakers around the globe call for regulation.Facebook's shares closed up 0.5 percent at $153.03 on Wednesday. They are still down more than 17 percent since March 16, when Facebook first acknowledged that user data had been improperly channeled in 2014 via a third-party app to Cambridge Analytica, which was later hired by Donald Trump's 2016 presidential campaign.The data leak has raised investor concerns that any failure by big tech companies to protect privacy could deter advertisers, who are Facebook's lifeblood, and lead to tougher regulation.SCRUTINY FROM LAWMAKERSFacebook Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg has repeatedly apologized for the mistakes the company made and has promised to crack down on abuse of the Facebook platform and restrict developers' access to user information.There is a new Facebook page - called Access Your Information - where users can see what they have shared and manage it."The biggest difference is ease of access in settings, which fulfills Mark Zuckerberg's promise to make the privacy process and permissions more transparent to users," Wedbush analyst Michael Pachter said.It was uncertain whether the changes will satisfy lawmakers.They were announced ahead of a stringent European Union data law which comes into force in May. It requires companies to give people a "right to portability" - to take their data with them - and imposes fines of up to 4 percent of global revenue for companies breaking the law.Lawmakers in the United States and Britain are still clamoring for Zuckerberg himself to explain how users' data ended up in the hands of Cambridge Analytica.He plans to testify before Congress, a source briefed on the matter said on Tuesday. Facebook has said it has received invitations to testify and that it is talking to legislators.Zuckerberg and the CEOs of Alphabet Inc and Twitter Inc have been invited to testify at an April 10 hearing on data privacy. The U.S. House Energy and Commerce Committee and U.S. Senate Commerce Committee have also asked Zuckerberg to appear at a hearing.The U.S. Federal Trade Commission has opened an investigation into Facebook, and attorneys representing 37 states are also pressing Zuckerberg to explain what happened.(Reporting by David Ingram and Julia Fioretti; Additional reporting by Laharee Chatterjee and Arjun Panchadar; Editing by James Dalgleish and Cynthia Osterman)WASHINGTON —  Facebook isn't just a company. It's a behemoth, with 2.1 billion monthly users, $40 billion in revenue and more than 25,000 employees worldwide.And that leaves Washington with a daunting task: How do you tame a corporate giant? Or do you even try?"It's tricky and it's going to be hard, but there are ways it can be dealt with," says Virginia Sen. Mark Warner, a former tech executive who has led investigations into Russian interference on social media over the last year as the top Democrat on the Intelligence Committee. "The idea that we're going to keep the wild, wild West — I don't think it's sustainable."The picture will begin to come into focus next week. Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg is scheduled to testify April 10 and 11 before Senate and House committees as his company grapples with the privacy scandal involving Cambridge Analytica, a political consulting firm linked to President Donald Trump.Facebook's reckoning in Washington comes on multiple fronts. Russia's use of the platform to meddle in U.S. elections, a regulatory investigation that could result in fines of hundreds of millions of dollars against the company for privacy violations, and the Cambridge Analytica episode are all topmost concerns.But in the capital's pro-business, anti-regulatory climate, it's questionable whether the Republican-led Congress or Trump regulators have the appetite to rein it in.Facebook is spending millions on lobbying to try to ward off regulations, even seeking to narrow a Senate bill that lawmakers call "the lightest touch possible." It would require more transparency in online political ads, something Facebook says it is providing on its own.But the stakes grew Wednesday when Facebook revealed that information belonging to as many as 87 million of its users may have been improperly shared with Cambridge Analytica, which gathered the data with the intent of swaying elections. That number was far higher than originally known.Congress' response to the myriad issues dogging Facebook could depend on Zuckerberg himself. He has apologized for a "major breach of trust" in the Cambridge Analytica episode and Facebook has announced it would stop working with third-party data collectors.Privacy advocates and legal experts say that's not enough."It strikes me as a company that is trying to weather a PR storm and then get back to business as usual and hoping their users forget this ever happened," said Nate Cardozo, a senior staff attorney for Electronic Frontier Foundation, a privacy group based in San Francisco.Facebook and other social media companies have faced bipartisan criticism over both privacy issues and the Russian intervention. But Trump and his pro-business GOP allies on Capitol Hill have made rolling back Obama-era regulations a priority, which makes any new federal rules for protecting data and privacy unlikely in the immediate future.Republicans last year struck down online privacy regulations issued during President Barack Obama's final months in office that would have given consumers more control over how companies like Comcast, AT&T and Verizon share information. Critics complained that the rule would have increased costs, stifled innovation and picked winners and losers among internet companies.And Congress elected to do nothing after Equifax disclosed in September that hackers exploited a software flaw that the credit monitoring company failed to fix, exposing Social Security numbers, birthdates and other personal data belonging to nearly 148 million Americans.Lawmakers have yet to come up with a fix for the patchwork of conflicting state laws that govern how companies shield personal data and notify consumers when breaches occur. Mike Litt, consumer campaign director at U.S. PIRG, a public interest group, said Congress instead is considering legislation that would exempt credit bureaus from data break notifications and make it harder for states to hold them accountable."After the Equifax data breach, we saw Congress talk a good game but fail to follow through on helping consumers," Litt said. "To prevent Congress from letting Facebook off the hook, outraged Americans need to keep up the heat."To defend its interests in Washington, Facebook has filled its executive ranks with former senior government officials from both political parties. Nathaniel Gleicher, its director of cybersecurity policy, was in charge of cybersecurity policy at the National Security Council during the Obama administration. Joel Kaplan, Facebook's vice president for global public policy, served as a senior aide to President George W. Bush.The company spent just over $13 million on lobbying in 2017, according to disclosure records filed with Congress. One of the lobbying team's newer members, Sandra Luff, was Attorney General Jeff Sessions' national security adviser when he served in the Senate.Zuckerberg suggested during a CNN interview last month that he's open to regulation. But he quickly qualified that commitment, saying he'd get behind the "right" kind of rules, such as the bill that requires online political ads to disclose who paid for them. But the company is seeking to weaken even that bill.Warner acknowledged that even minor regulation of Facebook and other technology companies will be difficult. But he's encouraging them to work with Washington now, before a "catastrophic event" that could shift the landscape or if Democrats win back seats in November's elections.He suggests several possibilities: requiring Facebook and other companies to disclose the country of origin of ads, creating a self-regulatory body, or even allowing users to move their data from one platform to another.More drastic measures could be to allow users to own their own data or to hold social media companies more responsible for what is posted on their platforms.In Europe, Facebook and other tech giants like Google are bracing for tough new data privacy rules that take effect May 25 and will apply to any company that collects data on EU residents, no matter where it is based. The rules will make it easier for consumers to give and withdraw consent for the use of their data.In the U.S., Facebook's biggest challenge may come from the Federal Trade Commission, which is investigating whether the company violated the terms of a 2011 settlement that made privacy assurances.Facebook agreed then to settle the commission's charges that it deceived users by assuring them their information would remain private, then repeatedly allowing it to be shared and made public. Each violation of the agreement could carry a penalty of up to $40,000, according to settlement terms, meaning potential fines in the hundreds of millions.Frank Pasquale, a University of Maryland law professor who's written extensively about how corporations use personal data, said the federal government's antitrust enforcers should be more vigilant with Facebook.Facebook has completed dozens of mergers and acquisitions since it was founded in 2004. Pasquale said the Obama administration failed to realize the significance of two of Facebook's largest purchases: the photo-sharing app Instagram for $1 billion in 2012 and WhatsApp two years later for nearly $22 billion."This is clearly a monopolistic company that is trying to eliminate even the smallest challenge to its domination of the social media market," he said.The privacy scandal has taken a heavy financial toll on Zuckerberg and Facebook. Forbes Magazine estimated that Zuckerberg's net worth dropped over the last month from $71 billion to $61.7 billion. Facebook's market value has fallen by more than $88 billion in less than three weeks since the scandal broke, from nearly $538 billion in mid-March to about $449.5 billion.___Associated Press writer Marley Jay in New York contributed to this report.(Reuters) - Facebook Inc said on Wednesday it would end its partnerships with several large data brokers who help advertisers target people on the social network, a step that follows a scandal over how Facebook handles personal information.The world's largest social media company is under pressure to improve its handling of data after disclosing that information about 50 million Facebook users wrongly ended up in the hands of political consultancy Cambridge Analytica.Facebook adjusted the privacy settings on its service on Wednesday, giving users control over their personal information in fewer taps.Facebook has for years given advertisers the option of targeting their ads based on data collected by companies such as Acxiom Corp and Experian PLC.The tool has been widely used among certain categories of advertisers - such as automakers, luxury goods producers and consumer packaged goods companies - who do not sell directly to consumers and have relatively little information about who their customers are, according to Facebook."While this is common industry practice, we believe this step, winding down over the next six months, will help improve people's privacy on Facebook," Graham Mudd, a Facebook product marketing director, said in a statement.Shares in Acxiom traded down more than 10 percent to $25 after Facebook's announcement after the bell. Shares in other data brokers were largely unchanged.Acxiom said late on Wednesday it did not expect this change to impact its revenue or earnings for the year ending in March.     The company currently expects revenue in the range of $910 million to $915 million in the 2018 fiscal year.However, for the 2019 fiscal year, Acxiom expects total revenue and profitability to be negatively impacted by as much as $25 million.Facebook declined to comment on how the change could affect its ad revenue.Advertisers would still be able to use third-party data services to measure how well their ads performed by examining purchasing data, Facebook said.Facebook's website lists nine third-party data providers that it has worked with, including Acxiom, Experian, Oracle Data Cloud, TransUnion and WPP PLC.Other companies, besides Acxiom, were not available for comment.Facebook on Wednesday also put all its privacy settings on one page and made it easier to stop third-party apps from using personal information. Privacy settings had previously been spread over at least 20 screens, Facebook said.Facebook said in a blog post it had been working on the updates for some time but sped things up to appease users' anger over how the company uses data and as lawmakers around the globe call for regulation.Facebook's shares closed up 0.5 percent at $153.03 on Wednesday. They are still down more than 17 percent since March 16, when Facebook first acknowledged that user data had been improperly channeled in 2014 via a third-party app to Cambridge Analytica, which was later hired by Donald Trump's 2016 presidential campaign.The data leak has raised investor concerns that any failure by big tech companies to protect privacy could deter advertisers, who are Facebook's lifeblood, and lead to tougher regulation.SCRUTINY FROM LAWMAKERSFacebook Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg has repeatedly apologized for the mistakes the company made and has promised to crack down on abuse of the Facebook platform and restrict developers' access to user information.There is a new Facebook page - called Access Your Information - where users can see what they have shared and manage it."The biggest difference is ease of access in settings, which fulfills Mark Zuckerberg's promise to make the privacy process and permissions more transparent to users," Wedbush analyst Michael Pachter said.It was uncertain whether the changes will satisfy lawmakers.They were announced ahead of a stringent European Union data law which comes into force in May. It requires companies to give people a "right to portability" - to take their data with them - and imposes fines of up to 4 percent of global revenue for companies breaking the law.Lawmakers in the United States and Britain are still clamoring for Zuckerberg himself to explain how users' data ended up in the hands of Cambridge Analytica.He plans to testify before Congress, a source briefed on the matter said on Tuesday. Facebook has said it has received invitations to testify and that it is talking to legislators.Zuckerberg and the CEOs of Alphabet Inc and Twitter Inc have been invited to testify at an April 10 hearing on data privacy. The U.S. House Energy and Commerce Committee and U.S. Senate Commerce Committee have also asked Zuckerberg to appear at a hearing.The U.S. Federal Trade Commission has opened an investigation into Facebook, and attorneys representing 37 states are also pressing Zuckerberg to explain what happened.(Reporting by David Ingram and Julia Fioretti; Additional reporting by Laharee Chatterjee, Arjun Panchadar and Ismail Shakil in Bengaluru; Editing by James Dalgleish and Cynthia Osterman)Facebook said it would roll out a centralized system for its users to control their privacy and security settings in response to an outcry over the way it has handled personal data.The system, which will be introduced to Facebook users globally over the coming weeks, will allow people to change their privacy and security settings from one place rather than having to go to roughly 20 separate sections across the social media platform.From the new page, users can control the personal information the social network keeps on them, such as their political preferences or interests, and download and review a file of data Facebook has collected about them. Facebook also will clarify what types of apps people are currently using and what permissions those apps have to gather their information.Facebook began developing the centralized system last year but sped it up after revelations that a British political consulting firm, Cambridge Analytica, improperly harvested the information of 50 million users of the social network. The amount of data Cambridge Analytica obtained about Facebook users reawakened fears over how much information the social network has gathered about people, leading to a #DeleteFacebook movement and other criticism.“The last week showed how much more work we need to do to enforce our policies, and to help people understand how Facebook works and the choices they have over their data,” Erin Egan, Facebook’s chief privacy officer, and Ashlie Beringer, a Facebook deputy general counsel, said in a statement announcing the new system. “We’ve heard loud and clear that privacy settings and other important tools are too hard to find, and that we must do more to keep people informed.”The Cambridge Analytica scandal has plunged Facebook into its worst crisis in years, with regulators and lawmakers in the United States and Britain demanding answers about how the social network deals with data privacy. Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, has agreed to appear in front of lawmakers on Capitol Hill next month, people familiar with the decision have said.Last week, Mr. Zuckerberg said in a statement that Facebook had to do better with user data and promised to roll out products that give users more control over their information and privacy settings.“One of our biggest responsibilities is to protect data,” he told The New York Times last week. “Whenever there’s an issue where someone’s data gets passed to someone who the rules of the system shouldn’t have allowed it to, that’s rightfully a big issue and deserves to be a big uproar.Late Wednesday, Facebook also said that it was halting its practice of allowing advertisers to target ads using information from third-party data brokers. These are business-to-business companies that can collect a vast range of details about individual consumers such as their shopping habits, health concerns, income range and preferred credit card.The social network had previously allowed advertisers to use consumer details from data brokers like Experian, Acxiom and Oracle’s Datalogix unit to help target ads to Facebook users. But Facebook said it was now mothballing that option, called “Partner Categories.””We want to let advertisers know that we will be shutting down Partner Categories,” Graham Mudd, a product marketing director at Facebook, said in a statement.“This product enables third-party data providers to offer their targeting directly on Facebook,” he added. “While this is common industry practice, we believe this step, winding down over the next six months, will help improve people’s privacy on Facebook.”In 2012, the Federal Trade Commission opened an inquiry into data brokers and subsequently recommended that Congress consider enacting a law “to make data broker practices more visible to consumers and to give consumers greater control over the immense amounts of personal information about them collected and shared by data brokers.”How much of a difference these actions may make to Facebook’s data privacy practices was unclear. Some privacy advocates noted, for instance, that the company’s new centralized privacy and security settings page has been tried in the past.“The platform made similar promises many times before,” said Zeynep Tufekci, an associate professor at the University of North Carolina who studies how technology affects society. She pointed out that in 2010, Mr. Zuckerberg said in The Washington Post that Facebook users needed simpler controls over their privacy and had promised then that Facebook would “add privacy controls that are much simpler to use.”Yet eight years later, the same concerns have resurfaced, Ms. Tufekci said.“The past decade shows that user concerns over privacy appear to have little teeth on changing how the platform behaves, aside from a recycling of contrite statements and promises to do better from its C.E.O.,” she said.NEW YORK —  The author of a provocative Facebook memo declaring that growth is justified even if it costs lives says he doesn't actually agree with the memo and wrote it to provoke debate.The 2016 internal memo, titled "The Ugly," was leaked to BuzzFeed this week. In it, Facebook executive Andrew Bosworth said "all the work we do in growth is justified," even if it costs people their lives because they are exposed to bullies or die in a terrorist attack coordinated through Facebook.Bosworth, who goes by "Boz," has been at Facebook since 2006 and serves as the company's vice president in charge of virtual- and augmented-reality efforts. Previously, he was vice president of ads and helped create Facebook features such as Messenger, its news feed and groups.Bosworth tweeted Thursday that the memo was one of the most unpopular things he's written internally, and "the ensuing debate helped shape our tools for the better."In a statement to BuzzFeed that Facebook confirmed, CEO Mark Zuckerberg called Bosworth a "talented leader who says many provocative things," but added the memo was something "that most people at Facebook including myself disagreed with strongly.""We've never believed the ends justify the means," Zuckerberg said in the statement. "We recognize that connecting people isn't enough by itself. We also need to work to bring people closer together. We changed our whole mission and company focus to reflect this last year."Facebook is grappling with an unprecedented crisis over allegations that Cambridge Analytica, a Trump-affiliated political consulting firm, obtained data of tens of millions of users without their permission with the intent of swaying elections. That followed a string of scandals, including revelations that Russia used its platform to meddle in U.S. elections.Facebook is facing new questions about its practice of collecting call and text histories from Android devices. The company has not provided details on why it needed this data or what it did with it, saying only that it was used to improve people's experience on Facebook. It's not clear how the data collection made Facebook users' experience better on Android devices when Facebook couldn't get the same data from iPhones.NEW YORK —  Facebook revealed Wednesday that tens of millions more people might have been exposed in the Cambridge Analytica privacy scandal than previously thought and said it will restrict the user data that outsiders can access.Those developments came as congressional officials said CEO Mark Zuckerberg will testify next week, while Facebook unveiled a new privacy policy that aims to explain the data it gathers on users more clearly — but doesn't actually change what it collects and shares.In a call with reporters Wednesday, Zuckerberg acknowledged he made a "huge mistake" in failing to take a broad enough view of what Facebook's responsibility is in the world. He said it isn't enough for Facebook to believe app developers when they say they follow the rules. He says Facebook has to ensure they do.Facebook is facing its worst privacy scandal in years following allegations that Cambridge Analytica, a Trump-affiliated data mining firm, used ill-gotten data from millions of users through an app to try to influence elections.Facebook said Wednesday that as many as 87 million people might have had their data accessed — an increase from the 50 million disclosed in published reports. Facebook is basing the estimate in part on the number of friends each user might have had. Cambridge Analytica said in a statement that it had data for only 30 million people.On Monday all Facebook users will receive a notice on their Facebook feeds with a link to see what apps they use and what information they have shared with those apps. They'll have a chance to delete apps they no longer want. Users who might have had their data shared with Cambridge Analytica will be told of that. Facebook says most of the affected users are in the U.S.Zuckerberg said fixing the company's problems will take years.Besides the privacy scandal, Facebook also has been dealing with fake news, the use of Facebook to spread hate and discord and concerns about social media's effect on people's mental well-being.These are "big issues" and a big shift for Facebook as it broadens its responsibility, Zuckerberg said. He added that he does think that by the end of this year the company will have "turned a corner" on a lot of the issues. Zuckerberg has made fixing the company his personal challenge for 2018.As part of the steps it's taking to address scrutiny about outsiders' access to user data, Facebook outlined several changes to further tighten its policies. For one, it is restricting access that apps can have to data about users' events, as well as information about groups such as member lists and content.In addition, the company is also removing the option to search for users by entering a phone number or an email address. While this helped individuals find friends, Facebook says businesses that had phone or email information on customers were able to collect profile information this way. Facebook says it believes most of its 2.2 billion users had their public profile information scraped by businesses or various malicious actors through this technique at some point. Posts and other content set to be visible only to friends weren't collected.This comes on top of changes announced a few weeks ago. For example, Facebook has said it will remove developers' access to people's data if the person has not used the app in three months.Earlier Wednesday, Facebook unveiled a new privacy policy that seeks to clarify its data collection and use.Although Facebook says the policy changes aren't prompted by recent events or tighter privacy rules coming from the EU, it's an opportune time. Zuckerberg is set to testify April 10 before a joint hearing of the Senate Commerce and Judiciary Committees, and a day later before the House Energy and Commerce Committee . The two sessions will be his first testimony before Congress. Separately, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission and various authorities in Europe are investigating.As Facebook evolved from a closed, Harvard-only network with no ads to a giant corporation with $40 billion in advertising revenue and huge subsidiaries like Instagram and WhatsApp, its privacy policy has also shifted — over and over.Almost always, critics say, the changes meant a move away from protecting user privacy toward pushing openness and more sharing. On the other hand, regulatory and user pressure has sometimes led Facebook to pull back on its data collection and use and to explain things in plainer language — in contrast to dense legalese from many other internet companies.The policy changes come a week after Facebook gave its privacy settings a makeover. The company tried to make it easier to navigate its complex and often confusing privacy and security settings, though the makeover didn't change what Facebook collects and shares either.Facebook's new privacy policy has a new section explaining that it collects people's contact information if they choose to "upload, sync or import" this to the service. This may include users' address books on their phones, as well as their call logs and text histories. The new policy says Facebook may use this data to help "you and others find people you may know."Several users were surprised to learn recently that Facebook had been collecting information about whom they texted or called and for how long, though not the actual contents of text messages. It seemed to have been done without explicit consent, though Facebook says it collected such data only from Android users who specifically allowed it to do so — for instance, by agreeing to permissions when installing Facebook.On Wednesday, Facebook said will delete all logs after a year and in the future, the only information this tool will collect from now on is the data that it needs to operate and "not broader data such as the time of calls."The new policy also makes it clear that WhatsApp and Instagram are part of Facebook and that the companies share information about users. WhatsApp will still have a separate policy as well, while Facebook and Instagram share one.___This story has been corrected to reflect that WhatsApp has its own privacy policy, while Facebook and Instagram share the same one.NEW YORK —  Some 60 companies including such leading brands as Subway, Sprint and the NFL are joining forces to help each other follow you around online.Adobe, a company better known for Photoshop and PDF files, says the new Device Co-op initiative it is organizing will help companies offer more personalized experiences and make ads less annoying by filtering out products and services you have already bought or will never buy. Under the initiative, Adobe can tell you're the same person on a home PC, a work laptop, a phone and a tablet by analyzing past sign-ins with member companies.The initiative comes amid heightened privacy sensitivities after reports that Facebook allowed a political consulting firm, Cambridge Analytica, to harvest data on millions of Facebook users to influence elections. Facebook also has been criticized for collecting call and text logs from phones running Google's Android system.Adobe's initiative underscores the role data plays in helping companies make money. Many of the initial uses are for better ad targeting.The company timed Wednesday's announcement to a digital marketing conference it is hosting this week in Las Vegas. Adobe executives said they believed their initiative offers strong privacy safeguards and weren't worried about a backlash in light of the Facebook scandal."With this stuff coming out now around Cambridge Analytica and Facebook, the bar has to be so high in terms of privacy," Adobe executive Amit Ahuja said.Adobe says no personal data is being exchanged among participating companies, which also include Allstate, Lenovo, Intel, Barnes & Noble, Subaru and the Food Network. Adobe says the program links about 300 million consumers across nearly 2 billion devices in the U.S. and Canada.The program would let Sprint, for instance, know that Bob is already a customer when he visits from a new device. Bob wouldn't get a promotion to switch from another carrier, but might get instead a phone upgrade offer. Or if Mary has declared herself a Giants fan on the NFL's app, she might see ads with Giants banners when visiting NFL.com from a laptop for the first time.All this might feel creepy, but such cross-device tracking is already commonly done by matching attributes such as devices that from the same internet location, or IP address. Consumers typically have little control over it.Adobe says it will give consumers a chance to opt out of such tracking. And it's breaking industry practices in a few ways. Adobe says it will honor opt-out requests for all participating companies and for all devices at once. It's more typical for such setups to require people do so one by one. All companies in the initiative are listed on Adobe's website, a break from some companies' practice of referring only to unspecified partners."We're doing everything we can not letting brands hide themselves," Ahuja said.But in taking an opt-out approach, which is common in the industry, Adobe assumes that users consent. And it places the burden on consumers to learn about this initiative and to figure out how they can opt out of it.(Reuters) - A U.S. judge has ordered Facebook Inc to let her review documents it has refused to give the Internal Revenue Service as that agency probes whether the social media company used an Irish unit to slash billions of dollars from its tax bill.In an order on Tuesday night, U.S. Magistrate Judge Laurel Beeler in San Francisco said she may review up to 15 of the 153 disputed documents, which Facebook believes are privileged or otherwise confidential. The government may select the documents for her to review.According to the government, most of the documents concern a decision by Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg and other Facebook executives to set up an international headquarters in Dublin, Ireland, which occurred in 2010, and the transfer of assets such as worldwide user bases and online platforms there.Facebook was warned by the IRS in July 2016 that the probe could boost its U.S. tax bill by $3 billion to $5 billion, plus interest and penalties, for tax years beginning in 2010. It said last month it has set aside adequate amounts for the probe.The Menlo Park, California-based company declined to comment on Wednesday.Beeler issued her order amid an unrelated worldwide outcry over Facebook's privacy practices, including the harvesting of user data by the London-based Cambridge Analytica research firm that worked on Donald Trump's 2016 U.S. presidential campaign.Facebook said on Dec. 12 it would stop booking international revenue in Ireland, and instead have local affiliates book such revenue in countries where it was generated.In making that change, which it expected to complete by the first half of 2019, Facebook cited a desire to "provide more transparency to governments and policy makers around the world."The company in 2016 routed 12.6 billion euros (US$15.5 billion) of revenue through Ireland but paid just 30 million euros (US$37 million) of taxes there, published reports said.The case is U.S. v Facebook Inc et al, U.S. District Court, Northern District of California, No. 16-03777.(Reporting by Jonathan Stempel in New York; Editing by Tom Brown)SAN FRANCISCO —  Facebook Inc Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said on Tuesday that he agreed "in spirit" with a strict new European Union law on data privacy but stopped short of committing to it as the standard for the social network across the world.As Facebook reels from a scandal over the mishandling of personal information belonging to millions of users, the company is facing demands to improve privacy and learn lessons from the landmark EU law scheduled to take effect next month.Zuckerberg told Reuters in a phone interview that Facebook was working on a version of the law that would work globally, bringing some European privacy guarantees worldwide, but the 33-year-old billionaire demurred when asked what parts of the law he would not extend worldwide."We're still nailing down details on this, but it should directionally be, in spirit, the whole thing," Zuckerberg said. He did not elaborate.His comments signal that U.S. Facebook users, many of them still angry over the company's admission that political consultancy Cambridge Analytica got hold of Facebook data on 50 million members, could find themselves in a worse position than Europeans.The European law, called the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), is the biggest overhaul of online privacy since the birth of the internet, giving Europeans the right to know what data is stored on them and the right to have it deleted.Apple Inc and some other tech firms have said they do plan to give people in the United States and elsewhere the same protections and rights that Europeans will gain.Shares of Facebook closed up 0.5 percent on Tuesday at $156.11. They are down more than 15 percent since March 16, when the scandal broke over Cambridge Analytica.PUSH FOR DATA PRIVACYPrivacy advocacy groups have been urging Facebook and its Silicon Valley competitors such as Alphabet Inc's Google to apply EU data laws worldwide, largely without success."We want Facebook and Google and all the other companies to immediately adopt in the United States and worldwide any new protections that they implement in Europe," said Jeff Chester, executive director of the Center for Digital Democracy, in Washington.Zuckerberg said many of the tools that are part of the law, such as the ability of users to delete all their data, are already available for people on Facebook."We think that this is a good opportunity to take that moment across the rest of the world," he said. "The vast majority of what is required here are things that we've already had for years across the world for everyone."Google and Facebook are the global leaders in internet ad revenue. Both based in California, they possess enormous amounts of data on billions of people.Google has declined to comment on its plans.When GDPR takes effect on May 25, people in EU countries will gain the right to transfer their data to other social networks, for example. Facebook and its competitors will also need to be much more specific about how they plan to use people's data, and they will need to get explicit consent.GDPR is likely to hurt profit at Facebook because it could reduce the value of ads if the company cannot use personal information as freely and the added expense of hiring lawyers to ensure compliance with the new law.Data is central to Facebook's advertising business, and it has not yet sketched out a satisfying plan for how it plans to comply, said Pivotal Research analyst Brian Wieser."I haven't heard any solutions from Facebook to get ahead of the problem yet," Wieser said.Failure to comply with the law carries a maximum penalty of up to 4 percent of annual revenue.It should not be difficult for companies to extend EU practices and policies elsewhere because they already have systems in place, said Nicole Ozer, director of technology and civil liberties at the American Civil Liberties Union of California.Companies' promises are less reassuring than laws, she said: "If user privacy is going to be properly protected, the law has to require it."(Reporting by David Ingram and Joseph Menn in San Francisco; Additional reporting by Salvador Rodriguez ; Editing by Peter Henderson, Bill Rigby and Himani Sarkar)SAN FRANCISCO —  Facebook Inc Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said on Tuesday that he agreed "in spirit" with a strict new European Union law on data privacy but stopped short of committing to it as the standard for the social network across the world.As Facebook reels from a scandal over the mishandling of personal information belonging to millions of users, the company is facing demands to improve privacy and learn lessons from the landmark EU law scheduled to take effect next month.Zuckerberg told Reuters in a phone interview that Facebook was working on a version of the law that would work globally, bringing some European privacy guarantees worldwide, but the 33-year-old billionaire demurred when asked what parts of the law he would not extend worldwide."We're still nailing down details on this, but it should directionally be, in spirit, the whole thing," Zuckerberg said. He did not elaborate.His comments signal that U.S. Facebook users, many of them still angry over the company's admission that political consultancy Cambridge Analytica got hold of Facebook data on 50 million members, could find themselves in a worse position than Europeans.The European law, called the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), is the biggest overhaul of online privacy since the birth of the internet, giving Europeans the right to know what data is stored on them and the right to have it deleted.Apple Inc and some other tech firms have said they do plan to give people in the United States and elsewhere the same protections and rights that Europeans will gain.Shares of Facebook closed up 0.5 percent on Tuesday at $156.11 (£110.8). They are down more than 15 percent since March 16, when the scandal broke over Cambridge Analytica.PUSH FOR DATA PRIVACYPrivacy advocacy groups have been urging Facebook and its Silicon Valley competitors such as Alphabet Inc's Google to apply EU data laws worldwide, largely without success."We want Facebook and Google and all the other companies to immediately adopt in the United States and worldwide any new protections that they implement in Europe," said Jeff Chester, executive director of the Center for Digital Democracy, in Washington.Zuckerberg said many of the tools that are part of the law, such as the ability of users to delete all their data, are already available for people on Facebook."We think that this is a good opportunity to take that moment across the rest of the world," he said. "The vast majority of what is required here are things that we've already had for years across the world for everyone."Google and Facebook are the global leaders in internet ad revenue. Both based in California, they possess enormous amounts of data on billions of people.Google has declined to comment on its plans.When GDPR takes effect on May 25, people in EU countries will gain the right to transfer their data to other social networks, for example. Facebook and its competitors will also need to be much more specific about how they plan to use people's data, and they will need to get explicit consent.GDPR is likely to hurt profit at Facebook because it could reduce the value of ads if the company cannot use personal information as freely and the added expense of hiring lawyers to ensure compliance with the new law.Data is central to Facebook's advertising business, and it has not yet sketched out a satisfying plan for how it plans to comply, said Pivotal Research analyst Brian Wieser."I haven't heard any solutions from Facebook to get ahead of the problem yet," Wieser said.Failure to comply with the law carries a maximum penalty of up to 4 percent of annual revenue.It should not be difficult for companies to extend EU practices and policies elsewhere because they already have systems in place, said Nicole Ozer, director of technology and civil liberties at the American Civil Liberties Union of California.Companies' promises are less reassuring than laws, she said: "If user privacy is going to be properly protected, the law has to require it."(Reporting by David Ingram and Joseph Menn in San Francisco; Additional reporting by Salvador Rodriguez ; Editing by Peter Henderson, Bill Rigby and Himani Sarkar)SAN FRANCISCO —  Facebook Inc Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said on Tuesday that he agreed "in spirit" with a strict new European Union law on data privacy but stopped short of committing to it as the standard for the social network across the world.As Facebook reels from a scandal over the mishandling of personal information belonging to millions of users, the company is facing demands to improve privacy and learn lessons from the landmark EU law scheduled to take effect next month.Zuckerberg told Reuters in a phone interview that Facebook was working on a version of the law that would work globally, bringing some European privacy guarantees worldwide, but the 33-year-old billionaire demurred when asked what parts of the law he would not extend worldwide."We're still nailing down details on this, but it should directionally be, in spirit, the whole thing," Zuckerberg said. He did not elaborate.His comments signal that U.S. Facebook users, many of them still angry over the company's admission that political consultancy Cambridge Analytica got hold of Facebook data on 50 million members, could find themselves in a worse position than Europeans.The European law, called the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), is the biggest overhaul of online privacy since the birth of the internet, giving Europeans the right to know what data is stored on them and the right to have it deleted.Apple Inc and some other tech firms have said they do plan to give people in the United States and elsewhere the same protections and rights that Europeans will gain.Shares of Facebook closed up 0.5 percent on Tuesday at $156.11 (£110.8). They are down more than 15 percent since March 16, when the scandal broke over Cambridge Analytica.PUSH FOR DATA PRIVACYPrivacy advocacy groups have been urging Facebook and its Silicon Valley competitors such as Alphabet Inc's Google to apply EU data laws worldwide, largely without success."We want Facebook and Google and all the other companies to immediately adopt in the United States and worldwide any new protections that they implement in Europe," said Jeff Chester, executive director of the Center for Digital Democracy, in Washington.Zuckerberg said many of the tools that are part of the law, such as the ability of users to delete all their data, are already available for people on Facebook."We think that this is a good opportunity to take that moment across the rest of the world," he said. "The vast majority of what is required here are things that we've already had for years across the world for everyone."Google and Facebook are the global leaders in internet ad revenue. Both based in California, they possess enormous amounts of data on billions of people.Google has declined to comment on its plans.When GDPR takes effect on May 25, people in EU countries will gain the right to transfer their data to other social networks, for example. Facebook and its competitors will also need to be much more specific about how they plan to use people's data, and they will need to get explicit consent.GDPR is likely to hurt profit at Facebook because it could reduce the value of ads if the company cannot use personal information as freely and the added expense of hiring lawyers to ensure compliance with the new law.Data is central to Facebook's advertising business, and it has not yet sketched out a satisfying plan for how it plans to comply, said Pivotal Research analyst Brian Wieser."I haven't heard any solutions from Facebook to get ahead of the problem yet," Wieser said.Failure to comply with the law carries a maximum penalty of up to 4 percent of annual revenue.It should not be difficult for companies to extend EU practices and policies elsewhere because they already have systems in place, said Nicole Ozer, director of technology and civil liberties at the American Civil Liberties Union of California.Companies' promises are less reassuring than laws, she said: "If user privacy is going to be properly protected, the law has to require it."(Reporting by David Ingram and Joseph Menn in San Francisco; Additional reporting by Salvador Rodriguez ; Editing by Peter Henderson, Bill Rigby and Himani Sarkar)(Reuters) - Shares of Acxiom Corp plunged as much as 34 percent on Thursday, after Facebook Inc said it would end its partnerships with several large data brokers who help advertisers target people on the social network.The stock has now lost nearly half of its market value since Facebook's comments on Wednesday that added to fears of increased scrutiny around how public data is handled and shared.Facebook is under pressure to improve how it manages data after disclosing that information on about 50 million Facebook users wrongly ended up in the hands of political consultancy Cambridge Analytica.The social network has for years given advertisers the option of targeting their ads based on data collected by companies such as Acxiom. Facebook's website lists nine third-party data providers that it has worked with, including Acxiom, Experian PLC, Oracle Data Cloud, TransUnion and WPP PLC.Arkansas-based Acxiom, which earns over $800 million a year selling consumer profiles to the world's largest companies, said late on Wednesday it did not expect this change to impact its revenue or earnings for the year ending in March.However, for fiscal year 2019, Acxiom expects total revenue and profitability to be hurt by as much as $25 million."The immediate impact was small. Now the question is how far does Facebook react to its issues," First Analysis analyst Larry Berlin said."A lot of what (Acxiom) is doing is probably not wrong and probably not at the core of the problem that Facebook has. Targeting consumers using data is sometimes very clean and sometimes it isn't."Even with little raw data, third-party data providers like  Acxiom attempt to build detailed pictures of individuals' finances, relationships, personal interests and purchasing tastes.These profiles power targeted advertising across the internet, and can also be used to determine what political issues people are interested in and how they might vote."I welcome Facebook's announcement that it will be shutting down its partner category service, using third party data to inform targeted advertising," said Britain's Information Commissioner Elizabeth Denham in a statement on Thursday.WPP, Experian, TransUnion and Cisco did not immediately respond to requests for comment.Shares of Acxiom were down 32 percent at $19 by midday. The stock touch its lowest in more than 2 years in early trading.TransUnion fell nearly 1 percent, while WPP was down marginally.(Reporting by Sonam Rai in Bengaluru; Editing by Saumyadeb Chakrabarty)LONDON —  I'm 57, with a 30-year-old wife, a fairly new hot water boiler, an old-style television, a petrol car and no kids.Actually, none of that is true. But that is what you might believe if you purchased access to my data from the world's largest information broker by market value.The recent revelation that data miner Cambridge Analytica Ltd. improperly accessed 50 million Facebook users' personal data has heightened public concern about the way companies harvest and use our personal data.I asked Arkansas-based Acxiom Corp., which earns over $800 million a year selling consumer profiles to the world's largest companies, what data and insights it held on me.In Europe and the U.S., companies like Acxiom are allowed to collect data from public and other sources about us. European privacy rules, which are due to be strengthened in coming months, require all data gatherers to disclose to any European who asks what information they hold on them. U.S. law doesn't give Americans the right to this level of disclosure.The result of my inquiry shows how, even with little raw data, companies attempt to build detailed pictures of individuals' finances, relationships, personal interests and purchasing tastes.These profiles now power the elaborate machinery that delivers advertising across the internet, and can also be used to determine what political issues people are interested in and how they might vote.The question is: How accurate are the pictures they sketch?"AFFLUENT FUN SEEKER"Acxiom - like its rivals - operates by gathering publicly available information from sources like the electoral roll, which gives individuals' addresses, and land registry data, which provides details on home ownership such as purchase price and if there is a mortgage on the property.It also buys data from companies that conduct online surveys, as well as websites where you forgot to tick 'don't share with third parties' and other sources. This data is then put into a proprietary model, which produces a list of data points and propensities, such as the likelihood a consumer might visit a betting shop.Acxiom sells access to these profiles to companies that wish to target advertising at potential customers. Acxiom doesn't have a political arm like Cambridge Analytica does, but the two companies do compete for commercial customers.Facebook, in the wake of the scandal over how it handles personal information, said on Wednesday it would end its partnerships with several large data brokers who help advertisers target people on the social network. Shares in Acxiom traded down more than 10 percent to $25 following Facebook's announcement.The results for a single individual obviously don't tell us too much about the accuracy of a database that Acxiom says contains 47 million UK profiles and insights into 700 million consumers worldwide.Also, it seems I am a bad data subject since I usually opt out when asked to give companies data sharing rights."Where we have more self-reported, privacy-compliant data about individuals, we can be more accurate. In your case, we held very little of this data and the majority of the variables linked to you, are modelled, based on both your postcode and the household history," Acxiom said in a statement.My Acxiom profile has around 750 individual data fields under a dozen categories from "household composition" to "employment & income" and "lifestyle & interests." It categorizes me as an “affluent fun-seeker.”. The accuracy of that description depends on your definition, I suppose, but some of the information is plain wrong.To start with, I'm 46 years old, not 57. I won't reveal my wife's age, but I will confirm that when I got married at age 34, it wasn't to a teenager. Two children mean we're not "empty nesters," I drive a diesel car and our boiler is more than 15 years old, not less than five years as Acxiom identifies it as.That could be a disappointment for the companies including Tesco supermarket, Twitter, Ford Motor Company and Facebook to whom Acxiom said it may have provided my data in the past year. Or maybe not.PROFILE ERRORSThe fact that my profile contains errors isn't necessarily a problem for marketers said Carol Hargreaves, a professor and director of the Data Analytics Consulting Center at the National University of Singapore.What really matters is the predictions of one's behavior, interests and propensity to buy certain kinds of products."The things you sell to a male of 46 or a male of 57 are the same," Hargreaves said.In some potentially key areas, the data is certainly better than a random guess. It predicted that I had just a 5.2 percent probability of being self-employed, rather than employed. Official data shows around 17 percent of Britons are self-employed.Acxiom's prediction of my household income was also much closer to the actual number than the average published by the Greater London Authority for my electoral ward, or local electoral district, the narrowest official estimate.But if purchase decisions are driven by lifestyle interests, the data collected on me is of little use to marketers.My predicted annual car mileage was 8,000 to 10,000 miles, based on "modelled probability." This figure echoes the 8,405 miles that car breakdown group the RAC says the average London motorist drives each year. But it's over twice my annual mileage.Acxiom incorrectly says I don't have a flat screen television, something it "derived through modeling," even though a UK government report from 2013 says most households do.One in seven Britons is a member of a gym, according to a 2017 industry survey; Acxiom reckons there's a 47.5 percent chance that I am interested in belonging to a gym. My last subscription expired over a decade ago.Acxiom also thinks I am more likely to be interested in crossword puzzles – I haven't done one since the 1980s – than in current affairs, which has been my working life for 20 years.On the positive side, there are indications Acxiom doesn't engage in racial profiling: The company predicts I have a 13.6 percent probability of interest in regularly going to a bar. I asked Hargreaves, the professor, if this seemed a statistically reasonable estimate for an Irish journalist. After she stopped laughing, Hargreaves said accurate predictions hinged on the raw data on which the profile is based.BAND WAGONAcxiom said individual inaccuracies didn't undermine the value of its service."We know from working with leading brands, that data helps them deliver more accurate and relevant marketing to customers at scale... The key factor here is, 'at scale'," it said in a statement.Annabel Kilner, Chief Commercial Officer at furniture retailer MADE.com said consumer data helped firms deliver messages that consumers found relevant."We adopt a test and learn approach to optimizing our campaigns," Kilner said.Xiaojing Dong, associate professor of marketing and business analytics at Santa Clara University in Silicon Valley, said that qualitative predictions like those produced by Acxiom gave advertisers a much better idea of who they are reaching.But Hargreaves said there was concern among some advertisers that the consumer profiles they purchase from data aggregators may not always be worth the large fees involved. Hargreaves said she is about to start working with clients of companies like Acxiom to ascertain whether they were getting value for money."Some of the data vendors are just jumping on the band wagon," she said.The key to accurate profiling, experts said, was good raw data. The best is held by those companies with whom we have the deepest interactions – social media giants like Facebook or Twitter and retailers like Amazon.com.Stephan Lewandowsky, a professor of cognitive psychology at the University of Bristol in Britain, said that explains why companies like Cambridge Analytica would be so eager to access Facebook data."The difference between using the electoral roll and Facebook is that the information we reveal on Facebook is sufficient for a computer program to infer our personality with greater accuracy than our own spouse," he said.(Reporting by Tom Bergin; Editing by Cassell Bryan-Low)MENLO PARK, Calif. —  "We've made a bunch of mistakes." ''Everyone needs complete control over who they share with at all times." ''Not one day goes by when I don't think about what it means for us to be the stewards of this community and their trust."Sound familiar? It's Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg addressing a major privacy breach — seven years ago .Lawmakers in many countries may be focused on Cambridge Analytica's alleged improper use of Facebook data, but the social network's privacy problems go back more than a decade. Here are some of the company's most notable missteps and promises around privacy.2007The social media darling unveils its Facebook Platform to great fanfare. Zuckerberg says app developers can now access the web of connections between users and their friends, a set of connections Facebook calls the "social graph.""The social graph is changing the way the world works," he says .That November, Facebook launches Beacon , which shares what users are doing on other websites with their Facebook friends. Many users find it intrusive and difficult to disable. Massachusetts resident Sean Lane buys his wife a diamond ring for Christmas on Overstock.com, but Facebook ruins the surprise , an incident leading to a class-action lawsuit.In December, Zuckerberg apologizes and enables users to shut off Beacon. "I know we can do better," he says .2008Facebook launches Facebook Connect , aiming to correct Beacon's mistakes by requiring users to take deliberate action before they share activity from other websites when logged in using Facebook. More than 100 websites use the tool at launch, including CNN and TripAdvisor.2009Facebook announces "privacy improvements" after a yearlong review by Canada's Office of the Privacy Commissioner found that it geared its default privacy settings toward openness, failed to inform users their data would be used to serve ads, and leaked data to third party developers, including when their friends used apps. Facebook vows to encourage "users to review their privacy settings" but does not agree to all the recommendations.Beacon is officially shut down, settling Lane's class action lawsuit.The American Civil Liberties Union warns people that Facebook's default settings mean that when a friend uses an app or takes a quiz, the quiz- or app-maker can peer into your profile, even if you've made it private.2010App-makers exhibit a sophisticated grasp of data they can scoop from Facebook's social graph.The Wall Street Journal reports that many popular apps are transmitting personalized Facebook data to dozens of advertising and internet companies, among them, Zynga's breakout game FarmVille. Facebook responds by shutting down some apps.Prior to the Journal report, Facebook says it has redesigned its privacy tools, giving its 400 million users "the power to control exactly who can see the information and content they share.2011The Federal Trade Commission reaches a consent decree with Facebook after an investigation of its broken privacy promises to consumers.The FTC alleges, among other things, that:—Facebook made its users' friend lists public in December 2009, even if they had been set to private, without telling them.—Even if users limited data sharing to "friends only," data was actually shared with third party apps that friends used.—Facebook failed to verify the security of apps it put on a "verified apps" list.—Facebook promised not to share personal information with advertisers, but did.Facebook promises to submit to a privacy audit every two years for the next 20 years, and Zuckerberg owns up to mistakes.2012Facebook introduces new methods to help advertisers reach people in ways "that protect your privacy," including an encryption tool called Custom Audiences that lets marketers match the email addresses of sales leads to the addresses that Facebook users used to set up their accounts.Facebook also rolls out new privacy tools aimed at simplifying its convoluted and confusing privacy controls. Among other things, it narrows the scope of app permissions so they don't suck in as much user data automatically.2013Facebook shares two-year-old anonymized data on billions of friendships between countries with Cambridge researcher Aleksandr Kogan and co-authors a research paper with him (published in 2015).Kogan creates a quiz app, installed by around 300,000 people , giving him access to tens of millions of their friends' data.2014Facebook says it dramatically limits the access apps have to friend data, preventing the type of data scoop Kogan and others were capable of. It also requires developers to get approval from Facebook before accessing sensitive data.2015Facebook says it learns from Guardian journalists that Kogan has shared data with Cambridge Analytica in violation of its policies. It bans the app and asks Kogan and Cambridge Analytica to certify they had deleted the data.It rolls out "Security Checkup ," a new tool aimed at simplifying its convoluted and confusing privacy controls.2017Facebook introduces "Privacy Basics ," a Frequently Asked Questions site aimed at simplifying its privacy controls.2018Facebook says it learns from The Guardian and other media outlets that Cambridge Analytica did not delete improperly obtained Facebook data and suspends the company, Kogan, and whistleblower Christopher Wylie from its service.Zuckerberg tells CNN that "I'm really sorry that this happened." He promises to audit app makers that gathered massive amounts of data prior to 2014 and to notify affected users. Amid calls for investigations in the U.S. and U.K., the FTC begins investigating whether Facebook broke its 2011 consent decree."Our responsibility now is to make sure that this doesn't happen again," Zuckerberg says.Facebook redesigns its privacy settings menu on mobile devices and says in a blog post, "It's time to make our privacy tools easier to find."___NEW YORK —  Facebook's decision to stop working with third-party data collectors might earn it public-relations points, but it does little to protect your privacy. The social network still has more than enough data on your interests and hobbies to target ads with precision.The company will still tap browser and device IDs to track visits to third-party sites and apps. And it will have lots more information from your use of its service — everything from the businesses and hobbies you "like" to the types of news articles you read and share. The data helps Facebook create profile targets — such as college-educated mothers in Detroit who like ice cream and the band Coldplay — for advertisers to reach.Limiting its partnership with data brokers also doesn't touch on the difficulty Facebook has had keeping your data out of the hands of other companies. The social network is in the spotlight following accusations that a data-mining firm used ill-gotten data from tens of millions of Facebook users to try to influence elections.Facebook may try to defuse that criticism by saying it's backing off on some data use, said Jon Reily, vice president of commerce strategy at the digital consulting company SapientRazorfish. But, he noted, "they didn't need that sixth wheel on a car anyway."In a clear sign of who needs whom more, shares of Acxiom, a leading data collector that Facebook had contracted with, tumbled 19 percent Thursday. Facebook's stock saw a 4 percent gain, reversing some of the big losses it's suffered since the scandal involving Cambridge Analytica, a Trump-affiliated consulting firm, broke almost two weeks ago.Late Wednesday, Facebook said it was shutting down a type of advertising product that allowed marketers to use data from people's offline lives to target them on Facebook. The information includes categories like home ownership and purchase history and comes from some of the world's largest data brokers, including Acxiom, Epsilon and Experian. The decision came on the same day Facebook said it would make it easier to use its privacy controls and to see the data the company collects on its users.These data brokers have troves of data on credit scores, family status, pet ownership and hobbies, which they glean from surveys, warrantee cards, retail loyalty programs and other sources. Brokers typically don't have a direct relationship with consumers, and how they get the data is often questionable, said Peter Reinhardt, CEO of Segment, a consumer data firm."Removing these brokers is a no-brainer, as they add very little incremental value to advertisers and a lot of rightful scrutiny to Facebook," Reinhardt said.Facebook said shutting down the advertising feature over the next six months "will help improve people's privacy on Facebook." But it wouldn't have stopped Cambridge Analytica from grabbing data inappropriately through an app that purported to be a research tool. Though Facebook has clamped down on apps' ability to get data on your friends, it still lets apps collect plenty of data on you. That isn't changing with Wednesday's moves.And even without direct access to the brokers' data, Facebook was already able to build prediction models based on it, said Kenneth Sanford, lead analytics architect at the data science company Dataiku. So Facebook could use that model to ascertain other characteristics of people who buy Purina cat food, even if Facebook no longer gets data on which users indeed bought Purina."In the beginning, Facebook had a tremendous value in knowing those things they didn't otherwise know," Sanford said. "Over time, they've been able to accumulate that information."Besides data brokers, which will lose a source of revenue, advertisers who don't already have a lot of insights on their own customers might suffer in the short term. Debra Aho Williamson, principal analyst at the research firm eMarketer, said those advertisers might cut their spending on Facebook temporarily, but Facebook will try to shift them to its many other methods of ad targeting.Losing access to purchase history could hurt some advertisers. If Purina wants to target cat lovers on Facebook, it might not know that your spouse does the actual buying — and that any advertising targeted at you might be wasted. But experts think such advertisers will just find other sources for that data to restore such insights.David Ciancio, senior customer strategist at the data science specialist Dunnhumby, said the change means little more than "an extra step for advertisers." The effects on Facebook, he said, will be "relatively marginal."___AP Technology Writer Barbara Ortutay contributed to this report.SAN FRANCISCO —  A Facebook Inc executive said in an internal memo in 2016 that the social media company needed to pursue adding users above all else, BuzzFeed News reported on Thursday, prompting  disavowals from the executive and Facebook Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg.The memo from Andrew Bosworth, a Facebook vice president, had not been previously reported as Facebook faces inquiries over how it handles personal information and the tactics the social media company has used to grow to 2.1 billion users.Zuckerberg stood by Bosworth, who goes by the nickname "Boz," while distancing himself from the memo's contents. Bosworth confirmed the memo's authenticity but in a statement he  disavowed its message, saying its goal had been to encourage debate.Facebook users, advertisers and investors have been in an uproar for months over a series of scandals, most recently privacy practices that allowed political consultancy Cambridge Analytica to obtain personal information on 50 million Facebook members. Zuckerberg is expected to testify at a hearing with U.S. lawmakers as soon as April."Boz is a talented leader who says many provocative things. This was one that most people at Facebook including myself disagreed with strongly. We've never believed the ends justify the means," Zuckerberg said in a statement.Bosworth wrote in the June 2016 memo that some "questionable" practices were all right if the result was connecting people."That's why all the work we do in growth is justified. All the questionable contact importing practices. All the subtle language that helps people stay searchable by friends," he wrote in the memo, which BuzzFeed published on its website.He also urged fellow employees not to let potential negatives slow them down."Maybe it costs a life by exposing someone to bullies. Maybe someone dies in a terrorist attack coordinated on our tools. And still we connect people," he wrote.Bosworth said Thursday that he did not agree with the post today "and I didn't agree with it even when I wrote it."Having a debate around hard topics like these is a critical part of our process and to do that effectively we have to be able to consider even bad ideas, if only to eliminate them," Bosworth's statement said.(Reporting by David Ingram; editing by Grant McCool)GENEVA —  The scandal over data privacy that is causing a headache for Facebook Inc shows just one aspect of the huge task of preparing the world for e-commerce, the United Nations trade and development agency UNCTAD said on Wednesday.Facebook has faced a global outcry and its shares have slid in value after a whistleblower said data from millions of users was improperly harvested by consultancy Cambridge Analytica to target U.S. and British voters."The current debate about Facebook and data privacy vividly illustrates that most countries are ill-prepared for the digital economy," UNCTAD Secretary-General Mukhisa Kituyi said in a statement.Data privacy is just one of many boxes that national regulators need to tick if they hope to get a handle on e-commerce, UNCTAD's head of internet and computer technology analysis Torbjörn Fredriksson told a news conference.Other issues include legal questions related to e-transactions and e-signatures, consumer protection online, data protection, cybercrime, taxation and domain names."Then you look at trade logistics, especially to try to address what we call the tsunami of parcels, when people start ordering from online platforms instead of going to the retail shop that has bought everything in bulk," he said.In developing countries, internet purchases are still mainly paid for with cash on delivery, and central banks and finance ministries need to help ensure access to online payment systems, Fredriksson added.But most developing countries are still unclear about whose job it is to coordinate e-commerce, he said.Without online payments, local firms would struggle to export on international e-commerce platforms such as Amazon and Alibaba, while the flood of imports risks creating a trade imbalance."There is some concern that ... there is a risk of concentration of markets among the big platforms," Fredriksson said, adding that UNCTAD was working on ways to address the problem.Although rich countries are thinking about how they need to adapt, poorer countries are largely flying blind, with no data for example on e-commerce circumventing national trade rules, which could help the traffic in counterfeit goods."There are concerns about jobs that may be lost, taxation, customs revenue, there's a whole range of issues that are challenges more than opportunities perhaps," Fredriksson said."Governments are increasingly looking at it, but whether they are looking at it enough is another issue."(Reporting by Tom Miles; Editing by Catherine Evans)JERUSALEM —  Israel announced Wednesday it was launching a domestic digital health database that could make it a global medical powerhouse. The move aims to improve public health worldwide but critics warn it risks compromising personal privacy.Eli Groner, director-general of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's office, said the system could help prevent disease by pairing each individual with his or her own relevant data. With easy access to a person's medical history, he said it may be possible to become informed of a looming disease before one actually contracts it."The database will be unlike anything in the world," Groner said.If successful — something he said depends on the number of those willing to participate — the database could be shared with medical researchers globally and help diagnose trends and help develop better medication worldwide.Groner said the launch is expected by the end of 2018, stressing that divulging data depends on individual consent and that teams are now hammering out details on how to ensure maximum privacy.The innovation is possible in part because of Israel's relatively small size and already centralized health care system. Most of the country's 8.7 million citizens are members of four main health care providers, which have been maintaining their records digitally for years. The new database aims to collect all the information in one place.At his weekly Cabinet meeting, Netanyahu said Sunday the $275 million project is of "historic significance" and that its goal is to improve "preventive medicine" and also achieve "personal medicine, personally calibrated for each person."The announcement comes as Facebook's privacy practices have come under fire following revelations that it failed to prevent the data-mining firm Cambridge Analytica from amassing personal information about millions of users and that the social network has been collecting Android users' phone call and text message histories without notice.Critics say the selling of medical records for profit could spell disaster for patient confidentiality.Tehilla Shwartz Altshuler, a senior fellow at the Israel Democracy Institute, said even data entered anonymously does not guarantee long-term confidentiality and it is unclear what uses will be made in the future with data disclosed now."Medical records are the most private information you could think about, it includes DNA, bloodwork, all medical history," she said. "Stuff you may not want insurance companies, employers, spouses, whoever to know — you don't even want Facebook to know so that it won't be able to mesh it up with other information it has about you."NEW YORK —  The U.S. stock market has taken a beating on the recent technology rout. But for short-sellers, it has been nothing short of a boon.Short-sellers who placed bets that the shares of four big tech leaders, known as the FANG group, as spelled out by their first initials, were due for a fall have made more than $4 billion in profits over the last two weeks and more than $1 billion during the first two trading days in April, financial analytics firm S3 Partners LLC said on Tuesday.The FANG group is comprised of four closely watched internet stocks: Facebook Inc, Amazon.com Inc, Netflix Inc and Alphabet Inc's Google.Doug Kass, who runs hedge fund Seabreeze Partners Management Inc, said he has been shorting Amazon shares because of "the existential threat of regulation has surfaced and has deflated the FANG bubble. Importantly, it is a bipartisan regulatory and antitrust threat."Short-sellers aim to profit by selling borrowed shares on the hope of buying them back later at a lower price and pocketing the difference."Social media's technological achievements and progress have outsped regulatory supervision and oversight," Kass said. He highlighted the recent discovery that information of about 50 million Facebook users had wrongly ended up in the hands of political consultancy Cambridge Analytica as he noted the potential jeopardy of the trust of users, which is  "a fundamental and necessary ingredient to future corporate success and measured in engagement."A strict new European Union law on data privacy takes effect on May 25. Facebook Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg told Reuters on Tuesday that the social network had no immediate plans to apply the law in its entirety to the rest of the world.Governments are also taking action on other fronts. The European Commission last month proposed new rules to ensure that digital business activities are taxed in a fair and growth-friendly way in the EU. Kass also noted the European Union's record $2.7 billion antitrust fine against Google.The overhang of increased government oversight has taken a bite out of the fortunes of large technology companies in the past. Microsoft Corp reached a settlement in an antitrust case with the Department of Justice in 2002 that lasted until 2011, contributing to a long period of underperformance that kept the stock below the high it reached in 1999 until 2016. Since then, the stock is up nearly 60 percent on the strength of its cloud-based services.And not all short bets on tech stocks have been money makers. Some short-sellers have held their bets against the FANGs since the middle of 2017 and have yet to turn a profit.Billionaire investor David Einhorn includes bets against Amazon and Netflix as part of his "bubble basket." While conventional wisdom suggests that recent turbulence in these stocks could have benefited short-sellers, Einhorn said the shorts did not perform as he hoped this year."We believe our investment theses remain intact. Despite recent results, our portfolio should perform well over time," Einhorn said in his quarterly letter to investors on Tuesday.So far this year, Amazon shares are up over 19 percent and Netflix shares have soared nearly 48 percent. Alphabet and Facebook, however, are down year-to-date.(Reporting by Jennifer Ablan and Trevor Hunnicutt; Additional reporting by Svea Herbst-Bayliss; Editing by Leslie Adler)SAN FRANCISCO —  Facebook is expanding its response to people using the platform improperly and on Tuesday said it had deleted hundreds of Russian accounts and pages associated with a "troll factory" indicted by U.S. prosecutors for fake activist and political posts in the 2016 U.S. election campaign.Facebook said many of the deleted articles and pages came from Russia-based Federal News Agency, known as FAN, and that the social media company's security team had concluded that the agency was technologically and structurally intertwined with the St. Petersburg-based Internet Research Agency.Facebook Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg told Reuters in an exclusive interview that the agency "has repeatedly acted to deceive people and manipulate people around the world, and we don't want them on Facebook anywhere."The world's largest social media company is under pressure to improve its handling of data after disclosing that information about 50 million Facebook users wrongly ended up in the hands of political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, which worked on then-Republican candidate Donald Trump's campaign.The removed accounts and pages were mainly in Russian, and many had little political import, the company said. Previously Facebook focused on taking down fake accounts and accounts spreading fake news.The new policy will include otherwise legitimate content spread by those same actors, Zuckerberg said."It is clear from the evidence that we've collected that those organizations are controlled and operated by" the Internet Research Agency, he added.In February, the agency known as IRA was among three firms and 13 Russians indicted by U.S. Special Counsel Robert Mueller on charges they conspired to tamper in the presidential campaign and support Trump while disparaging Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton.Russian media organization RBC last year reported that FAN and IRA once shared the same street address and had other connections. One of the people that it said made decisions at FAN was indicted by Mueller's office, which is investigating U.S. intelligence agency conclusions that Moscow tried to undermine the democratic process. Russia denies interfering in the elections.BAN ACCOUNTSFacebook disclosed in September that Russians used Facebook to meddle in U.S. politics, posting on the social network under false names in the months before and after the 2016 elections.Zuckerberg said on Tuesday that improved machine learning had helped find connections between the latest posts and IRA. He and Facebook security officials said the company would do the same when they find more legitimate content being pushed out by groups exposed as manipulators."We’re going to execute and operate under our principles," Zuckerberg said. "We don’t allow people to have fake accounts, and if you repeatedly try to set up fake accounts to manipulate things, then our policy is to ban all of your accounts."Zuckerberg said that the standard is high for such retribution toward news organizations and that state-owned media by itself was fine.The company decided to root out as much as it can of IRA, which was involved with posts including sponsoring fake pages that were pro-Trump, pro-border security and protesting police violence against minorities, among other topics.The expanded response could provoke a backlash from Russian internet regulators.Last October, Google followed up on reported connections between FAN and IRA by removing FAN stories from its search index. Media regulator Roskomnadzor asked Google for an explanation, saying that it needed to protect free speech. Google then reinstated FAN, according to reports at the time.Facebook officials said its accounts and pages in question had 1 million unique followers on Facebook and 500,000 on Instagram, mainly in Russia, Ukraine, and nearby countries such as Azerbaijan and Uzbekistan.Zuckerberg, who founded Facebook in his college dorm room in 2004, personally kept quiet about the Cambridge Analytica data leak for four days before apologizing and outlining steps that he said would help protect personal data.The 33-year-old billionaire plans to testify before U.S. lawmakers to explain Facebook's privacy policies, a first for him, a source said last week, although he has so far not committed to doing the same for UK lawmakers.Britain's data protection authority, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission and some 37 U.S. state attorneys general are investigating Facebook's handling of personal data.Zuckerberg initially downplayed Facebook's ability to sway voters, saying days after the U.S. elections that it was a "pretty crazy idea" that fake news stories had an influence.Eventually, though, Facebook's security staff came to the conclusion that the social network was being used by spies and other government agents to covertly spread disinformation among rivals and enemies.Critics including U.S. Senator Mark Warner, the top Democrat on the Senate Intelligence Committee, have complained Facebook moved too slowly to investigate and counter information warfare.Facebook stepped up efforts to shutter fake accounts before  a national election last year in France, and has said it will work with election authorities around the world to try to prevent meddling in politics.The company, which is now one of the main ways politicians advertise to voters, plans to start a public archive showing all election-related ads, how much money was spent on each one, the number of impressions each receives and the demographics of the audience reached.Facebook is on track to bring that data to U.S. voters before congressional elections in November, Zuckerberg said on Tuesday. Facebook plans to send postcards by U.S. mail to verify the identities and location of people who want to purchase U.S. election-related advertising.(Reporting by Joseph Menn and David Ingram; additional reporting by Jack Stubbs; editing by Peter Henderson and Grant McCool)Good Wednesday. Here’s what we’re watching:• Another bank takes steps toward gun safety.• The next steps in the tariffs tit-for-tat.• Investigators are looking into the motive behind the shooting at YouTube’s headquarters.• What happens after Spotify’s direct listing?•  Alexis Ohanian of Reddit speaks to Corner Office about online platforms, fatherhood and Metallica.Get this in your inbox each morning. Sign up here.Britain’s decision to leave the European Union provides pointers for investors as President Trump ratchets up trade tensions with China.In the weeks following Britain’s vote in 2016 for “Brexit,” fears grew that the post-war economic order was under serious threat. But European stock markets recovered, including Britain’s. Investors came to see that the European Union was not going to break up, and Britain was not going to erect tall walls around its economy. Looking back, the panicky early reaction to Brexit seems to have sprung more from a fear of the unknown than any big threats to the global trading system. Investors took a deep breath and gained some perspective.Movements in the United States stock market suggests the same thing is happening in response to President Trump’s trade policies. China on Tuesday evening announced the tariffs it plans in retaliation against those President Trump is threatening. Reacting to China’s announcement, the S.&P. 500 index plunged early on Wednesday but recovered strongly to close up 1.2 percent.Investors may believe China’s move will lead to drawn-out negotiations. Here, Brexit is again illustrative. As the back and forth between the European Union and Britain has gone on, investors have gained more clarity and confidence. If talks between the U.S. and China gain steam, the uncertainty now clouding relations between the two countries may gradually clear.But the standoff between the U.S. and China differs in important ways from the Brexit tensions. The U.S., for instance, is in a much stronger position than Britain. China exports far more to the U.S. than the U.S. does to China. Limiting access to the U.S. economy could hurt China’s growth at a time when it is trying to overhaul important economic sectors. If investors believe that the U.S. can successfully exploit its advantages to make China more friendly to foreign businesses, they may even see the trade skirmish as positive for the global economy.But Brexit also flashes a warning to those expecting a big win for Mr. Trump. One of the reasons that the European Union has presented a united front is that it sees Brexit as a threat to its values and goals. Similarly, China may believe that Mr. Trump’s trade attack puts some of its most deeply held aspirations under threat – and will fight back hard.- Peter EavisAfter Citigroup announced plans to limit firearms sales by business customers, the question was which lenders would be the next to make a move on guns. The latest: Amalgamated Bank, the union-owned bank known for its socially minded policies.The firm said on Wednesday that it would adopt guidelines for lenders laid out by Everytown for Gun Safety, an advocacy group backed by Mike Bloomberg.Among those recommendations:• Require gun dealers to protect merchandise from burglary and theft and refuse sales to people who appear in distress or intoxicated• Require retailers to stop selling high-capacity magazines and bump stocks• Require gun makers to “commit to developing innovations in firearms that will allow law enforcement to more easily solve gun crimes”Amalgamated said that it would not only require all business customers to adhere to those guidelines but added that it won’t invest any of its own money in gun manufacturers or distributors.Here’s what Amalgamated’s C.E.O. Keith Mestrich, said in a news release:— Michael J. de la MercedFacebook on Wednesday said the personal information of up to 87 million people, most of them Americans, may have been improperly shared during the 2016 election with Cambridge Analytica, a political consulting firm connected to President Trump.The new figure sharply increased the company’s previous estimate of how many users’ information was harvested by Cambridge Analytica. The number had been put at more than 50 million users.The sharing of the user data has unleashed a torrent of criticism at Facebook, the world’s largest social network. The company’s stock is down sharply since The New York Times and The Observer of London reported on how Cambridge Analytica improperly acquired users’ data.The company released the revised estimate of affected users in an extended statement on Wednesday about its plans for handling personal data. The company said it will start alerting users on April 9 about whether their information may have been shared with Cambridge Analytica.In related Facebook news• Earlier on Wednesday, lawmakers in Washington had said Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, would testify before the House Energy and Commerce Committee on April 11 about the company’s handling of sensitive user data.Beijing moved quickly to escalate its fight with the U.S., responding to the White House’s latest move with $50 billion worth of tariffs on soybeans, cars, chemicals and more. U.S. market futures predictably dropped, as did other markets.Both sides could suffer. Chinese companies are scrambling to react, especially as the U.S. looks to be taking aim at technology (like that central to Made in China 2025). And the squeeze could extend to American companies in unexpected industries, like wine.The big question: Is a full-blown trade war coming? Nathaniel Taplin of Heard on the Street writes, “If ongoing negotiations fail and these tariffs become a reality, the long-term impact will likely be far more damaging.”And is dragging down the Dow Jones industrial average. The blue-chip index is off nearly 350 points, or 1.4 percent. That slide is worse than the declines of the S.&P. 500 and the Nasdaq Composite, which are both down less than 1 percent.Boeing’s 4 percent fall has shaved 87 points off the Dow Wednesday. Boeing is the highest priced stock in the price-weighted index, which means Boeing has an outsized impact on the index’s moves.Boeing’s shares have served as a proxy for investor concern about a possible trade war with China since the Trump administration announced tariffs on aluminum and steel.Over that period, the stock has fallen 12 percent.The streaming-music company’s shares opened at $165.90, but they steadily decline throughout their first day of trading, closing at $149.01.The stock is down 4.1 percent to $142.91 in early trading Wednesday.Because Spotify eschewed a typical initial public offering in favor of a direct listing, there is no I.P.O. price off which to base the performance of its shares. But the company’s current shares price remains well above the $132.50 its private shares changed hands at earlier this year.Spotify finished Tuesday valued at $26.5 billion. Does that count as a success? Shira Ovide of Gadfly argues no, since only a tiny fraction of Spotify’s shares are available to trade.And will it lead to a wave of direct listings, leaving depressed, workless I.P.O. bankers in its wake? Maybe not, though the Big Board acknowledged signs of more informal interest in direct listings.Sony.Its subsidiary, Sony Music Entertainment, owned 5.7 percent of Spotify ahead of its listing. Sony said it sold 17.2 percent of that stake Tuesday. Sony expects to book a non-operating profit of $986 million this quarter from the increased valuation of the Spotify shares it continues holds and from the share sale.At Tuesday’s close, Sony’s 5.7 percent stake was worth $1.5 billion.Sony isn’t only Asian tech company benefitting from Spotify’s smooth debut. Tencent, the Chinese social media company, holds a 7.5 percent stake. That was worth about $2 billion as of Tuesday’s close.The video site and its parent company, Alphabet, are still grappling with the shooting at YouTube’s headquarters in the Bay Area yesterday. What we know: Police identified the shooter as Nasim Najafi Aghdam, who was in her late 30s and killed herself at the scene. Three people were hurt, one critically.What we don’t know: the motive. Ms. Aghdam, who posted to YouTube and other social media, criticized the video site’s policies on Facebook in February. But authorities haven’t highlighted any specific grievance, and said they had yet to find evidence that specific individuals were targeted.What may change: security in Silicon Valley. YouTube, like many other big tech companies, doesn’t have visible metal detectors or armed guards.• Robert Mueller reportedly told President Trump’s lawyers that he’s a subject of interest, but not yet an investigation target. A former Skadden lawyer who admitted deceiving Mr. Mueller’s investigators, Alex van der Zwaan, was sentenced to 30 days in prison and fined $20,000.• The Treasury Department and the Office of Management and Budget are fighting over how to implement the tax overhaul, as businesses go to great lengths to lower their tax bills.• Senator Elizabeth Warren’s suggested method for measuring misconduct at financial institutions probably wouldn’t lead to more prosecutions. (White Collar Watch)• John Williams is the next president of the New York Fed, despite calls for diversity. (NYT)• Articles about Scott Pruitt are now focusing on ethical improprieties, not regulatory rollbacks. (NYT)At issue in WPP’s inquiry into its C.E.O., Martin Sorrell, are allegations of misuse of company assets and of personal misconduct, according to the WSJ. Mr. Sorrell has denied any wrongdoing.The investigation comes at a tough time: WPP’s revenue is down, and competition from Google and Facebook is up. One of the FT’s unnamed sources couldn’t see how Mr. Sorrell would survive.In other misconduct news: Morgan Stanley fired Douglas Greenberg, a star financial adviser accused of physical abuse and stalking by multiple women, following an NYT investigation.Forbes profiled All Raise, a group of 36 women trying to double the percentage of women in V.C. partner roles and to increase funding to female founders to 25 percent from 15 percent. It has commitments of $2 million from supporters like Silicon Valley Bank and is in talks with Melinda Gates’s investment firm.Diversity, they argue, will help investors spot future successes like Stitch Fix.It’ll be a joust, over money and management. CBS has reportedly submitted a takeover bid for its corporate sibling, Viacom — but one below Viacom’s market value of $12.5 billion, and without a No. 2 slot at the combined company for the target’s C.E.O., Bob Bakish.That isn’t going to sit well with either Mr. Bakish or his patron, Shari Redstone. Tara Lachapelle of Gadfly argues that ego shouldn’t hold up a deal.The deals flyaround• Procter & Gamble is reportedly talking to Pfizer about buying its consumer health business, but far from agreeing on a price. GlaxoSmithKline and Reckitt Benckiser both walked away. (CNBC)• The Justice Department is relying on a skewed study of the Time Warner deal, lawyers for AT&T argued in court. (Bloomberg)• Elliott Management has purchased a $1 billion stake in various affiliates of Hyundai Motors, another venture into Korean chaebols. (Elliott)• The high-end coffee brand La Colombe, reportedly hired Moelis & Company to explore the sale of a stake that could value the company at $1 billion. (Bloomberg)• The Chinese digital conglomerate Meituan has bought Mobike, a bike-sharing company, for $2.7 billion. (CNBC)The Japanese conglomerate has reportedly given up day-to-day control over the Fortress Investment Group to help its deal pass the powerful U.S. security watchdog known as Cfius, according to the FT. That could make the investment firm a less useful support for SoftBank’s $100 billion Vision Fund.The takeaways: The efforts by SoftBank’s Masa Son to court President Trump don’t always translate into favorable treatment by the White House, and national security concerns will weigh heavily on foreign investment in the U.S. post-Broadcom.The president has pressed his claim that Amazon is “costing the United States Postal Service massive amounts of money,” (It isn’t.)Vanity Fair reports that some specific anti-Amazon ideas have been kicked around, including rethinking Amazon’s contract with the U.S.P.S., canceling its cloud services contract with the Pentagon and encouraging state investigations. (Amazon does not have a contract with the Department of Defense for cloud computing services. The contract for those services has not been awarded to any company including Amazon.)But Bloomberg can find no active discussions about such actions, and Wall Street analysts say investors should ignore the noise, which puts Amazon in good company.More on Amazon and the cloud: Mr. Trump was scheduled to dine last night with Safra Catz of Oracle. Why is that important?The tech flyaround• Tesla’s first-quarter production still fell short of an already lowered target, but shares in the embattled carmaker rose anyway. Investors might want to be wary of Elon Musk’s promises.• Facebook removed over 270 accounts and pages tied to Russia’s Internet Research Agency, widely regarded as a troll factory. Mark Zuckerberg won’t globalize Europe’s stricter privacy regulations. Tim Wu of Columbia Law School argues that Facebook needs replacing, not fixing.• India’s government is eager to collect personal data, but bad at protecting it, an NYT Op-Ed contributor argues. (NYT)• Apple has hired John Giannandrea from Google to run its machine learning and A.I. strategy. (NYT)• Deutsche Bank formally named John Thain, Mayree Clark and Michele Trogni to its supervisory board. (Deutsche Bank)• Goldman Sachs has reportedly hired Hari Moorthy, an engineer at JPMorgan Chase, to build tools to help big companies manage cash. (WSJ)• Companies’ charitable spending is more self-serving than they would have us believe. (NYT)• An Indian government crackdown on fake news lasted less than a day. (NYT)• The Chinese conglomerate Anbang will receive $9.7 billion from an industry rescue fund. (WSJ)• Longfin, a fintech company that went public under small-company rules in December, lost 85 percent of value in six trading days and is now under investigation by the S.E.C. (WSJ)• After one of its worst quarters ever, David Einhorn’s hedge fund Greenlight Capital is sticking to its strategy. (CNBC)Note: While we congratulated Villanova yesterday, we did not congratulate Notre Dame for its win on Sunday, which we heartily do so now.Know someone who would enjoy this newsletter? Tell them to sign up here.You can find live updates throughout the day at nytimes.com/dealbook.We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bizday@nytimes.com.NEW YORK —  Facebook is giving its privacy tools a makeover as it reels from criticisms over its data practices and faces tighter European regulations in the coming months.The changes won't affect Facebook's privacy policies or the types of data it gathers on users. But the company hopes its 2.2 billion users will have an easier time navigating its complex and often confusing privacy and security settings. Facebook says it also wants to give users a simpler way to access and download the data it collects on them.Wednesday's announcement follows revelations that a Trump-affiliated consulting firm, Cambridge Analytica, got data on millions of Facebook users. That included information on friends of people who had downloaded a psychological quiz app, even though those friends hadn't given explicit consent to sharing. In addition, Facebook is also facing widespread criticism for collecting years of contact names, telephone numbers and call and text histories from Android users. The company has not said exactly what it used such data for or why it needed it. On Monday, the Federal Trade Commission said it is investigating Facebook over its privacy practices.Facebook's chief privacy officer, Erin Egan, said in a blog post that most of the privacy updates have been in the works for "some time, but the events of the past several days underscore their importance."Facebook also said it plans to update its privacy policy and terms of service in the coming weeks, but gave no further details.The company has tried over the years to simplify its privacy settings, yet the controls remain hard to find and use for many people. For example, Facebook announced in 2009 that it was consolidating six privacy pages and more than 30 settings on to a single privacy page.Yet mobile users still had to go to nearly 20 different places to access all of their privacy controls. Now, Facebook says they will be accessible from a single place. Facebook says it is also adding "clearer explanations" about how its privacy controls work.Chris Cox, Facebook's chief product officer, called the new settings "the first of many steps" the company is taking to address privacy concerns.Facebook has been working on the changes in preparation for the European Union's General Data Protection Regulation, which were approved two years ago and take effect May 25. The rules are designed to make it easier for consumers to give and withdraw consent for the use of their data. They apply to any company that collects data on EU residents, no matter where it is based.To comply with this, Facebook is adding a section called "access your information," a secure way for users to manage data they've shared with the company, including status updates, comments and things they have searched for. That's where people can go to delete information or download a copy. While this download was already possible, it took some time to figure out how to do it. Cox said the changes let people browse through their information in detail, without having to download it. For example, users will now be able to look up a post from a specific date in the past.Cox said that while the changes are "in line with the principle of GDPR," there's also a "bunch of stuff that goes above and beyond that."Facebook also said it will propose updates to its terms of service in the coming weeks and update its privacy policy, but gave no further details. (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• Kim Jong-un, the North Korean leader, made a surprise trip this week to meet with President Xi Jinping of China, Mr. Kim’s first trip abroad since taking power in 2011.Mr. Kim is preparing for summit meetings with U.S. and South Korean leaders, and the visit suggests that he values or needs China’s approval — and possibly advice — before the talks.New satellite images suggest that North Korea is expanding its nuclear production capabilities, which could complicate President Trump’s efforts to persuade Pyongyang to give up its weapons.• The U.S. and South Korea are to announce a bilateral trade agreement today. It’s the type of deal that Mr. Trump says benefits American workers, but it may have more to do with geopolitical realities.• Fearing an undercount, at least a dozen states signaled on Tuesday that they would sue to block the Trump administration from adding a question about citizenship to the 2020 census.Opponents say the question would dissuade noncitizens, and even legal immigrants, from answering. The Trump administration says it’s needed for accurate estimates of voter numbers.The Constitution requires that all residents of the U.S. be counted, whether or not they’re citizens.• Here’s why  an accurate count is important.• Christopher Wylie was “like a pink-haired, nose-ringed oracle sent from the future to explain data” when he testified before British lawmakers on Tuesday, our correspondent writes.Mr. Wylie, the 28-year-old whistle-blower and co-founder of the political data firm Cambridge Analytica, described how personal information about 50 million Facebook users was harvested.He also said that his firm had received help from at least one employee of the defense contractor Palantir Technologies. Palantir was co-founded by Peter Thiel, a Facebook board member and supporter of President Trump.• Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, is said to have agreed to testify in at least one congressional hearing over the social network’s handling of user data.• It’s the latest example of how rarely law enforcement officers are prosecuted for violence against suspects.A pair of white police officers in Baton Rouge, La., will not be prosecuted by the state authorities over the fatal shooting of a black man, Alton Sterling, almost two years ago. Last year, the Justice Department also declined to bring charges in the case.• Separately on Tuesday, hundreds of demonstrators filled Sacramento City Hall to protest the death of Stephon Clark, an unarmed black man who was fatally shot by two officers last week.• Last week, we wrote about a major study of income inequality, focusing on how black boys and white boys raised in wealthy families fare as adults.Here are income mobility charts for other groups, and a tool to make your own comparisons.• Uber says it won’t  renew its permit to test self-driving cars in California until the end of an investigation into how one of its autonomous vehicles killed a woman in Arizona.Arizona’s governor ordered the company to suspend  tests there.• The fashion giant H&M has a problem: $4.3 billion worth of unsold clothes.• U.S. markets fell on Tuesday, led by tech stocks. Here’s a snapshot of global markets today.Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• Determine whether your sickness is contagious.• Here’s how to decide if you should tell your boss about your mental illness.• Recipe of the day: Bake a lemon tart with a filling that’s somewhere between a custard and a pudding.Our journalists recommend these great pieces:“Facebook’s data laxity, piggybacked on the general theme of fake news, has turned my field — social media — into the topic of the moment. This piece offers a look from the ground up at what exactly social media is, by going inside one of my favorite platforms, Reddit.” [The New Yorker]— Nancy Wartik, Reader Center“Adam Roberts died in January 2016 where he felt most alive: on the ski slopes of the Pacific Northwest. He was buried in an avalanche, an end that friends and even family felt he had courted. This is a story about skiing, and about a gifted and charismatic athlete who had a shot at professional status — but it’s really about ‘the blast zone of mental illness,’ which radiates out into so many lives.” [Outside]— John Schwartz, climate change reporter• New lessons from King’s deathThe 50th anniversary of the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. is next week. An exhibition at the National Civil Rights Museum in Memphis compares contemporary events with the demonstrations he led.We’d also like to hear what his assassination means to you.• A former justice speaksIn an Op-Ed, the retired Supreme Court justice John Paul Stevens argues that the Second Amendment needs to be repealed.• Tasty, whatever the categoryIt’s hard to say what kind of food Chez Ma Tante in Brooklyn serves, apart from the consistently good kind, our restaurant critic writes.• “Roseanne” is backThe ’90s sitcom returned to ABC on Tuesday, and the reboot “has the potential to do something a little deeper and more ambitious than your average nostalgia-fest,” our chief TV critic writes.We spoke with Roseanne Barr, who, like her character on the show, supports President Trump.If you prefer a dash of espionage, we also reviewed tonight’s premiere of the final season of “The Americans.”• Best of late-night TVTrevor Noah was worried about a comment by John Bolton, President Trump’s nominee for national security adviser: “ ‘The earlier you strike, the more damage you can do:’ I think that’s a horrible strategy for keeping peace in the world. Although it is a great strategy for tackling an all-you-can-eat buffet.”• Quotation of the day“I no longer have a family. The ruling regime is guilty. Every bureaucrat dreams of stealing like Putin. Every state functionary treats people like garbage.”— Igor Vostrikov, whose wife, three children and sister were among dozens who died in a fire at a mall in Siberia. • The Times, in other wordsHere’s an image of today’s front page, and links to our Opinion content and crossword puzzles.Each week, The Times’s crossword column, Wordplay, highlights the answer to one of the most difficult clues from the previous week’s puzzles.This week’s word: torii.Torii (pronounced TOR-ee-ee) are familiar as a symbol of Japan, but many solvers were unsure of the word when it appeared in the March 20 puzzle with the clue “Traditional Japanese gate.” It has appeared 63 times in Times crosswords.The gates, which have a traditional shape and structure, are closely related to the Shinto religion. Typically located at the entrance of shrines or in spots that hold special religious significance, they signal a transition from the profane world to the sacred. By walking through the torii, one has entered the world of the Kami, or Shinto gods.The earliest documentation of the torii in Japan dates to 922, during the Heian period.The structure of the torii varies, but the most important parts are the pillars (hashira), the lintel placed on the two pillars (kasagi) and a tie-beam that keeps the structure together (nuki).For the easier puzzles at the beginning of the week, the word might appear with the clue: “Shinto temple gateway” or “Shinto gateway.”Later in the week, it might be referred to as: “Shinto shrine entrance,” “Traditional Japantown feature,” “Decorative gateway in Japan” or “Japanese portal.”Deb Amlen contributed reporting._____Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays and updated all morning. Browse past briefings here.Sign up here to get it by email in the Australian, Asian, European or American morning. To receive an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights, sign up here.Check out our full range of free newsletters here.What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning. Outrage in Russia, a secret visit to Beijing and an abortion debate in Germany. Here’s the latest:• Pressure is building in Russia.President Vladimir Putin declared a nationwide day of mourning over the mall fire in Kemerovo that killed at least 64 people, including many children.As Mr. Putin blamed “criminal negligence” for the fire, thousands of people, above, protested nearby to demand transparency and accountability. “I no longer have a family,” one demonstrator said. “The ruling regime is guilty.”And after the mass expulsions of Russian diplomats over the poisoning of a Russian ex-spy on British soil, some in the Kremlin say tensions with the West could become more volatile than during the Cold War._____• A surprise international debut.North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, met secretly with China’s president, Xi Jinping, in Beijing. The clandestine discussions came weeks before planned summit meetings with American and South Korean leaders.It was Mr. Kim’s first trip outside North Korea since taking power six years ago, and may signal that he is trying to soothe strained relations amid the rush of global diplomacy around North Korea’s nuclear weapons program.China confirmed the trip this morning only after Mr. Kim left Beijing on the same armored train that stirred speculation when it arrived mysteriously in the Chinese capital on Monday. (Mr. Kim’s father and grandfather, the North’s former leaders, used similar trains for foreign trips.)Meanwhile, a new North Korean reactor appears to be coming online._____• Repeal America’s right to bear arms?John Paul Stevens, a retired U.S. Supreme Court justice, writes in a Times Op-Ed that scrapping the Second Amendment would move gun-law campaigners “closer to their objective than any other possible reform.”Mr. Stevens argues that, until a 2008 Supreme Court ruling, there was no absolute right to guns. He calls the amendment “a relic,” and says it needs to go.Separately, the National Rifle Association acknowledged that it accepts foreign donations but said it does not use them for election work, a response to growing pressure from federal investigators examining whether Russia used the group to influence the 2016 presidential election._____• A Nazi-era law  in Germany forbids doctors to advertise publicly that they perform abortions.Chancellor Angela Merkel, above, pledged to change the law, but a spiraling debate over the issue is driving a wedge in her new government.Meanwhile, a top Moscow avant-garde theater performing in Berlin is drawing attention to the plight of its leader, who is under house arrest in Russia and is an outspoken critic of President Vladimir Putin._____• If Carles Puigdemont, the former leader of Catalonia who was seized in Germany on Sunday, is returned to Spain, a trial could backfire by galvanizing the Catalan separatist movement. Above, a supporter of secession during a protest in Barcelona yesterday.But Mr. Puigdemont's arrest is already posing a test for European cohesion._____• Cosmetic surgery for a fish?That may sound extreme. But the Asian arowana, above, is not your average pet store fish.They’re a prized status symbol across Asia, with price tags that can reach tens of thousands of dollars. So for owners, less than $100 for an eyelift or chin job is pocket change.• H&M, one of the world’s biggest clothing retailers, has reported terrible results. Even worse: It has a $4 billion pile of clothes no one wants to buy.• Cambridge Analytica, the firm at the center of the Facebook data scandal, got help from an employee at Palantir Technologies, a top Silicon Valley contractor to American spy agencies that was co-founded by Peter Thiel, a supporter of President Trump.• Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, agreed to testify before Congress over the social network’s handling of customer data.• President Trump’s first major trade deal, with South Korea, may have been driven by looming talks with North Korea.• After Citigroup limited firearm sales by its retail clients, our business columnist suggested two more steps that banks could take to influence the gun control debate.• “Green gold.” How the avocado became the fruit of global trade.• U.S. stocks were lower. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.• The whistle-blower Christopher Wylie, above, who helped found Cambridge Analytica, told Britain’s Parliament that data-mining had swung the Brexit referendum. [The New York Times]• Hungary’s anti-immigrant prime minister, Viktor Orban, has waged a war on his nation’s democracy. Now, some fear his relentless remolding of Hungarian society. [The New York Times]• France’s top appeals court upheld a 30,000 euro fine against the National Front founder Jean-Marie Le Pen for dismissing Nazi gas chambers as a “detail” of World War II. [Politico]• Are you a U.S. citizen? The 2020 U.S. census will ask respondents that question to measure how many people are eligible to vote. Critics say it will result in a significant undercount of the population. [The New York Times]• Cyberattacks on Atlanta’s city government have crippled its computer networks and forced it back to doing business with ink and paper. [The New York Times]• A waiter in Canada was fired for rude behavior. His excuse: he’s French. [The Washington Post]Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• Encourage great hotel service by following these tips.• Determine whether your sickness is contagious.• Recipe of the day: Tonight, bake a lemon tart with a filling that’s somewhere between a custard and a pudding.• An American man, above, was wrongfully convicted of rape and murder and spent 23 years behind bars. This week, he returned to work as a groundskeeper for the Chicago White Sox baseball team.• A scientist searches for the world’s last remaining quiet places. This virtual reality Op-Doc takes you to a remote rain forest for a new perspective on the power of silence.• And the secrets of cockroaches: They can live for a week without a head and run as fast as 210 miles an hour, relative to their size. All of those feats, and more, are encoded in the insect’s genome, which scientists recently finished sequencing.Each week, The Times’s crossword column, Wordplay, highlights the answer to one of the most difficult clues from the previous week’s puzzles.This week’s word: torii.Torii (pronounced TOR-ee-ee) are familiar as a symbol of Japan, but many solvers were unsure of the word when it appeared in the March 20 puzzle with the clue “Traditional Japanese gate.” It has appeared 63 times in Times crosswords.These gates, which have a traditional shape and structure, are closely related to the Shinto religion. Typically located at the entrance of Shinto shrines or in spots that hold special religious significance, they signal to worshipers a transition from the profane world to the sacred. By walking through the torii, one has entered the world of the Kami, or Shinto gods.The earliest documentation of the torii in Japan dates to 922 A.D., during the Heian period.The structure of the torii varies, but the most important parts are the pillars (hashira), the lintel placed on the two pillars (kasagi) and a tie-beam that keeps the structure together (nuki).For the easier puzzles at the beginning of the week, the word might also appear with the clue: “Shinto temple gateway” or “Shinto gateway.”Later in the week, it might be referred to as: “Shinto shrine entrance,” “Traditional Japantown feature,” “Decorative gateway in Japan” or “Japanese portal.”Deb Amlen contributed reporting._____Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.Check out this page to find a Morning Briefing for your region. (In addition to our European edition, we have Australian, Asian and U.S. editions.)Sign up here to receive an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights, and here’s our full range of free newsletters.What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.___At the brink: US and China threaten tariffs as fears riseWASHINGTON (AP) — The world's two biggest economies stand at the edge of the most perilous trade conflict since World War II. Yet there's still time to pull back from the brink. Financial markets trembled Wednesday at the prospect of a U.S.-China trade war after Beijing and Washington proposed tariffs on $50 billion worth of each other's products in a battle over the aggressive tactics China employs to develop its high-tech industries.___Facebook scandal affected more users than thought: up to 87MNEW YORK (AP) —Facebook says tens of millions more people might have been exposed in the Cambridge Analytica privacy scandal than previously thought, up to 87 million instead of the 50 million reported before. Facebook says it will restrict the data it allows outsiders to access on its users. Those developments come as congressional officials said CEO Mark Zuckerberg will testify next week, while Facebook has a new privacy policy that aims to explain the data it gathers on users more clearly.___Police: YouTube shooter was calm when found sleeping in carSAN BRUNO, Calif. (AP) — The woman who shot and wounded three people at YouTube headquarters calmly told police who found her sleeping in her car that she was having family problems and had left her home. Authorities say Nasim Aghdam did not mention being angry with YouTube and gave no indication she was a threat to anyone. Later that day, she went to a gun range before walking into a courtyard at YouTube's campus south of San Francisco. That's where she fired a handgun several times and then killed herself.___On the Money: Glut of used cars gives buyers more optionsDETROIT (AP) — Bargain prices on 2- and 3-year-old vehicles fueled record sales of used cars, trucks and SUVs last year, a trend that is expected to continue because people can save thousands of dollars over buying new. Used car sales hit 39.2 million vehicles in 2017, more than double the number of new automobiles sold, according to the Edmunds.com auto website. About 4 million leased vehicles will return to the market this year, many of them relatively new with most of the technology that's on new vehicles.___AMC to open Saudi Arabia's first movie theaterNEW YORK (AP) — AMC says it will open Saudi Arabia's first movie theater on April 18. Cinema operators are rushing to build theaters in the Gulf kingdom after the Saudi government in December said it would open the country to commercial movie theaters for the first time in more than 35 years. AMC's first theater will open in Riyadh. It plans to open up to 100 theaters by 2030.___Marijuana not part of North Dakota's corporate farming banBISMARCK, N.D. (AP) — A North Dakota official says the state's Great Depression-era law banning corporate farming won't preclude horticulture operations from growing medical marijuana, provided it's not done on agricultural land. Attorney General Wayne Stenehjem issued the opinion at the request of the state health department. The intent of the corporate farming law is to protect the state's family farming heritage. But Stenehjem says the marijuana question is a tax law matter that doesn't fall under farming law.___CVS Health eyes kidney patients for next expansion into careWOONSOCKET, R.I. (AP) — CVS Health is now planning to treat kidney failure patients as the drugstore operator branches deeper into monitoring and providing care. The company said Wednesday it will offer home dialysis for patients through its Coram business and it is working with another company to develop a new device for that. A spokeswoman declined to name the company or say how much CVS is spending on the venture.___US services firms grew at a slower pace in MarchBALTIMORE (AP) — U.S. services firms expanded at a slower clip in March compared to the prior month, largely because the pace of business activity and new orders fell. The Institute for Supply Management says its services index dropped to 58.8 from 59.5 in February. Any reading above 50 points toward growth. The services sector has been expanding for more than eight years.___Stocks surge as market escapes early plunge on trade fearsNEW YORK (AP) — After being spooked by rising trade tensions between the US and China, stocks rallied Wednesday on hopes the two sides will settle their differences. The Dow Jones industrial average recovered from an early 501 point drop to gain 230. Retailers and household goods makers climbed while tech stocks reversed losses. Big industrials such as Boeing and Deere were lower.___The Standard & Poor's 500 index climbed 30.24 points, or 1.2 percent, to 2,644.69. The Dow Jones industrial average advanced 230.94 points, or 1 percent, to 24,264.30. The Nasdaq composite rose 100.83 points, or 1.5 percent, to 7,042.11. The Russell 2000 index of smaller-company stocks gained 19.51 points, or 1.3 percent, to 1,531.66.U.S. crude dipped 14 cents to $63.37 a barrel in New York while Brent crude, used to price international oils, fell 10 cents to $68.02 a barrel in London. Wholesale gasoline stayed at $1.98 a gallon. Heating oil lost 2 cents to $1.98 a gallon. Natural gas rose 2 cents to $2.72 per 1,000 cubic feet.Your company, 23andMe, does DNA tests that can tell you what countries your ancestors were from or what genetic diseases you may have or, most important, whether you suffer from “asparagus pee.” But your ultimate ambition is to take data culled from your customers’ DNA and use it to find cures and develop drugs. Why? The health care ecosystem that exists today is a $3-trillion-a-year economy and no one makes money if you stay healthy. There’s very little money that goes into prevention programs, and I think that’s not reflective of what you and I want. What we really care about most is not “How do I manage my Alzheimer’s?” but “How do I never get it in the first place?”Doesn’t 23andMe care about making money, too? We do. What I genuinely spend my nights thinking about is: Is there a way to monetize prevention? I don’t know exactly what that model is, but I know it’s the right thing to do. I stay up late at night thinking about this.You have some pretty lofty goals. Is there a specific event or milestone you would consider a marker of success? I would personally like to live and be healthy at 100. Success for me is healthy at 100. I’m only 44, but I would like all of us to be healthy at 100.If 23andMe ends up discovering a cure for Alzheimer’s or asparagus pee, will its customers, whose DNA contributed to the discovery, get a piece of those profits? We get that question a lot. It’s really hard to figure out microattributions. Pinpointing exactly what each person’s contribution to the entire process — the 11-year journey of development — is pretty hard. I do think we have an obligation of some sort.23andMe has partnerships with lots of third parties. Has the Facebook/Cambridge Analytica scandal given you any second thoughts about how you share data with other companies? I have to say, because we’re regulated, it’s a very different world for us than it is for Facebook. I think that one of the benefits is that it made us go a little bit slower. It’s an extra step of checkpoints about how you’re doing things.The site uses your DNA to match you with other relatives in the 23andMe database. How often do you hear about people who discover they’re actually adopted or have a secret sibling? Every day. Every day. The nonpaternity average in this country is much higher than people think it is. There’s a good chance there’s an “Uncle Joe” in your family who’s actually just “Joe.” So everyone has a story like that; they just don’t necessarily know it. In the early days, we wondered: How are we going to handle this? And in some ways, I think we’ve helped normalize it.The most popular things that people search for alongside your name are “net worth,” “A-Rod” and “Alex Rodriguez.” Why do you think people find your former relationship with A-Rod so fascinating? In some ways it’s a lot like genetics: On the outside we seem very different. On the inside, there were a lot of similarities. I have a lot of respect for him. There’s people in the world who talk a lot about what they want to do, and there’s people who do it. And that boy, he goes after the world with a voracious appetite.Can I ask you about whether gene stuff that happened in movies will ever happen in real life? Sure.With gene engineering available to only the wealthy, society will break down into two social classes, the modified and the unmodified. That’s “Gattaca.” No. By the time there’s really gene-editing ability, it’s going to be accessible to the majority of the population. Also, I think we’re a ways off from actually knowing how to modify. The human body is spectacularly complex beyond anything you could imagine.Will we ever bring a dinosaur back to life? I don’t think that’s feasible. But those are the things I dream about. Maybe I’ll think about that tonight instead of monetizing prevention.SAN FRANCISCO — Two days after Donald J. Trump won the 2016 election, executives at Google consoled their employees in an all-staff meeting broadcast around the world.“There is a lot of fear within Google,” said Sundar Pichai, the company’s chief executive, according to a video of the meeting viewed by The New York Times. When asked by an employee if there was any silver lining to Mr. Trump’s election, the Google co-founder Sergey Brin said, “Boy, that’s a really tough one right now.” Ruth Porat, the finance chief, said Mr. Trump’s victory felt “like a ton of bricks dropped on my chest.” Then she instructed members of the audience to hug the person next to them.Sixteen months later, Google’s parent company, Alphabet, has most likely saved billions of dollars in taxes on its overseas cash under a new tax law signed by Mr. Trump. Alphabet also stands to benefit from the Trump administration’s looser regulations for self-driving cars and delivery drones, as well as from proposed changes to the trade pact with Mexico and Canada that would limit Google’s liability for user content on its sites.Once one of Mr. Trump’s most vocal opponents, Silicon Valley’s technology industry has increasingly found common ground with the White House. When Mr. Trump was elected, tech executives were largely up in arms over a leader who espoused policies on immigration and other issues that were antithetical to their companies’ values. Now, many of the industry’s executives are growing more comfortable with the president and how his economic agenda furthers their business interests, even as many of their employees continue to disagree with Mr. Trump on social issues.The relationship remains bumpy. Mr. Trump lashed out at Amazon on Twitter on Thursday, accusing the e-commerce giant of evading taxes. (Amazon said it had saved $789 million under the tax law Mr. Trump signed.) The president is also expected to sign legislation,  passed by the Senate last week, that would strengthen policing of sex trafficking online — a bill that internet companies once opposed because they worried it would make them liable for content posted by their users.Yet quietly, the tech industry has warmed to the White House, especially as companies including Alphabet, Apple and Intel have benefited from the Trump administration’s policies.Those include lowering corporate taxes, encouraging development of new wireless technology like 5G and, so far, ignoring calls to break up the tech giants. Mr. Trump’s tougher stance on China may also help ward off industry rivals, with the president squashing a hostile bid to acquire the chip maker Qualcomm this month. And Mr. Trump let die an Obama-era rule that required many tech start-ups to give some workers more overtime pay.Mr. Trump “has been great for business and really, really good for tech,” said Gary Shapiro, who leads the Consumer Technology Association, the largest American tech trade group, with more than 2,200 members including Apple, Google, Amazon and Facebook.Mr. Shapiro said that he had voted for Hillary Clinton, Mr. Trump’s opponent, in 2016, but that he and many tech executives had come around on Mr. Trump. While they disagree with him on immigration and the environment, they have found areas where their interests align, like deregulation and investment in internet infrastructure.“This isn’t Hitler or Mussolini here,” Mr. Shapiro said. And even though the president’s new tariffs on steel and aluminum could hurt American businesses and consumers, “disagreement in one area does not mean we cannot work together in others,” Mr. Shapiro said. “Everyone who is married knows that.”Mr. Trump himself has taken to naming tech companies he says are on his side.After Apple took advantage of the new tax law in January to bring back most of the $252 billion cash hoard that it had parked overseas, the company said it would make a $350 billion “contribution to the U.S. economy” over the next five years. That prompted Mr. Trump to suggest he had made good on a campaign pledge to get Apple to bring jobs back to the United States.“You know, for $350 million, you could build a beautiful plant. But for $350 billion, they’re going to build a lot of plants,” the president told members of Congress last month. Mr. Trump said he had called Timothy D. Cook, Apple’s chief executive, to personally thank him.In fact, Apple has no plans to build a plant in the United States. The company is uneasy with Mr. Trump’s invoking it to signify how his policies are working, according to a person close to Apple who was not authorized to speak publicly. Apple has not, however, publicly corrected the president.Mr. Trump has also stayed quiet on the controversy engulfing Facebook over user privacy, while other politicians have called for more regulations after revelations that the British political consulting firm Cambridge Analytica improperly harvested the information of 50 million Facebook users. Cambridge Analytica used that data to aid Mr. Trump’s campaign.Michael Kratsios, the White House’s deputy chief technology officer, said in an interview that while Mr. Trump and Silicon Valley had their differences, “in places where we do see eye to eye, I think we’re achieving extraordinary success.”Dean Garfield, head of the Information Technology Industry Council, a 102-year-old advocacy group that represents the biggest tech firms, said his members walked a tightrope, supporting and opposing the president on different issues. Lately, he said, “we have reached balance in the tightrope.”The equilibrium marks a turnabout from what had been a testy relationship between Mr. Trump and the tech sector. On the campaign trail in 2016, Mr. Trump was so critical of tech companies that Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s chief executive, once joked he might send Mr. Trump to space in a rocket.Some tech executives have since disagreed with Mr. Trump on social issues. Mr. Cook emailed staff last June to say he had unsuccessfully lobbied the president to remain in the Paris climate accords. In November, Microsoft sued the administration to protect a law that blocks deportation of young undocumented immigrants known as Dreamers. More than 100 companies, including Google, Facebook and Uber, filed a brief supporting California’s lawsuit on that issue.Even so, tech executives worked to build a relationship with the president, with some meeting him at Trump Tower before his inauguration and again at the White House in June. While in Washington for the second meeting, Mr. Cook and Satya Nadella, Microsoft’s chief executive, also dined with Jared Kushner, the president’s senior adviser and son-in-law, and Ivanka Trump at the couple’s Washington home, according to a person briefed on the meeting who wasn’t authorized to speak publicly about it. This month, Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin visited Apple’s headquarters.Silicon Valley has found plenty to like about the Trump presidency. In September, tech giants including Facebook and Microsoft teamed up with the administration to pledge $500 million to computer science education. Amazon, Microsoft and Google are also eyeing the administration as a potential customer as Mr. Trump pushes to modernize the government’s digital infrastructure.But Silicon Valley’s favorite thing about Mr. Trump is almost certainly his new tax code. Many tech companies lobbied for corporate tax reform for years before Mr. Trump signed the new tax bill.Tech giants immediately reaped the benefits. Under the new rules, Apple saved $43.7 billion in taxes, according to the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy, a nonpartisan research group. Apple then announced the $350 billion “contribution” to the economy over five years.Most of the tally was previously planned spending with American suppliers and a $38 billion tax payment on its overseas cash. But Apple also said it planned to hire 20,000 new workers, invest in new data centers and another domestic campus, and increase a fund for innovative American manufacturers to $5 billion from $1 billion. It also gave employees $2,500 bonuses.The president was quick to tweet the news.The shifting relationship between Silicon Valley and Mr. Trump appears to have upset some tech employees. A Facebook page called “Angry Googler,” with nearly 1,000 followers, has been dedicated to criticizing Google for any sign it was cooperating with the president.“Not happy about Google pulling a 180 and jumping into bed with Trump? Same here,” said the “About” section of the page, which suggests it is run by a Google employee. This month, the page posted an article about Google helping the Defense Department analyze drone footage. “We’ve gone from organizing the world’s information to … optimizing weapons of war,” the page said.Messages to the account were not returned. Google declined to comment.Some tech firms remain discomfited about appearing as the president’s allies. Last month, Rob Goldman, Facebook’s vice president of advertising, played down Russia’s impact on the 2016 election after the Justice Department charged 13 Russians with trying to subvert its outcome, including by using Facebook. Mr. Trump retweeted Mr. Goldman approvingly.Facebook was uncomfortable with that association with the president, said a person close to the company who was not authorized to speak publicly.Two days later, Facebook’s policy chief, Joel Kaplan, distanced the company from Mr. Goldman’s comments.“The special counsel has issued its indictments, and nothing we found contradicts their conclusions,” he said in a statement. “Any suggestion otherwise is wrong.”Good Wednesday. Here’s what we’re watching.• Are we witnessing the end of the tech mania?• Amazon has shed more than $50 billion in market value.•Are investors waking up to Tesla’s real problem?• Mark Zuckerberg agreed to testify before Congress.• SoftBank and Saudi Arabia are planning the world’s largest solar energy project.Get this in your inbox each morning. Sign up here.Investors, always willing to believe in technology companies, spent the last three years piling into the shares of companies like Facebook, Amazon and Netflix with special abandon. Now the intellectual underpinnings of the tech rally are being seriously tested.Stocks in the best-known tech companies have plunged in recent days. The NYSE FANG+ index, which tracks the share price of 10 companies, including Facebook, Apple and Amazon, has fallen nearly 14 percent from its recent high. Given that the index has soared 50 percent in just the past 12 months, the recent decline could just be the sort of sell-off that punctuates any long-term rally.Still, several large tech companies suddenly face challenges that could undermine their ability to transform whole industries. And as we’ve seen after previous fervors, investors can take a long time to regain their faith.Facebook is down 20 percent from its recent high. Most of the slide came after news reports showing how the company’s data was misused. Investors have to grapple with the possibility that Facebook won’t be sharing as much data as it does, undermining its ability to generate ever-increasing amounts of advertising revenue.Nvidia, a computer chip maker intent on being a leader in automated driving technology, is off 12 percent from its recent high. The company said on Tuesday that it would halt tests of its autonomous driving technology on public roads after an Uber self-driving car hit and killed a pedestrian in Arizona.Tesla is not a tech stock, but it is included in the FANG+ index, and its supporters believe deeply in its power to revolutionize the auto industry. Growing fears about Tesla’s ability to finance its expansion have helped drag its stock down 33 percent from its recent high. Ominously, the price of Tesla’s bonds is also falling, signaling that the company is losing the confidence of creditors.Of course, on their march higher, tech stocks overcame obstacles, like management problems at Uber and the poor performance of Snap’s initial public offering.But the latest problems have raised deeper, broader doubts, and that may keep the uncertainty around longer. Investors have viewed automated driving technology as a huge potential source of growth for some companies. But after the Uber incident in Arizona, those companies may take a more realistic look at what they have to spend to create a technology that is efficient and safe, and conclude that they have to pull out of the race or pare back. Users of social media and regulators may prevent social media companies from sharing so much of their data with advertisers, and that could restrain revenue growth.And if the passion for two or three big tech companies wanes, the cooling may spread.— Peter EavisThe reason?Reports that President Trump wants to rein in the e-commerce giant.Jonathan Swan of Axios, citing anonymous sources, reported:Mr. Swan added:Shares of Amazon have tumbled more than 7 percent at one point Wednesday, but they pared those losses after a White House official told Reuters there were no specific policy changes related to Amazon being considered at the moment. But the official added that the administration is always looking at different options on a range of policy issues.How concerned should investors be?GBH Insights analyst Daniel Ives writes:Guess which companies are benefiting from Amazon's woes? Retailers, the FT points out.On a day when the stocks on Wall Street are flat, Macy’s was up 3.5 percent, J.C. Penney has gained 5.5 percent, Walmart rose 1.7 percent, Target increased 1.8 percent, and Kohl’s was up 2.4 percent.The electric carmaker’s shares are down 7 percent Wednesday, after plunging 8 percent on Tuesday.Tuesday’s slide was driven, in part, by the National Transportation Safety Board’s announcement that it was investigating a fatal crash last week involving a Tesla vehicle in California. News that Jaguar Land Rover was teaming up with Alphabet Inc.’s Waymo unit probably didn't help either.But the continued decline in Tesla’s stock — its shares are down more than 20 percent since mid-March — speaks to the bigger concern surrounding Tesla: How it funds itself.Investors have grown increasingly worried as Tesla burns through cash and struggles to meet its own production goals for the Model 3. Late Tuesday, Moody’s downgraded Tesla’s credit rating further into junk territory and said its outlook on the company is negative. The credit ratings agency cited production delays and said Tesla may soon need to raise more than $2 billion.Those concerns can be seen not just in Tesla’s stock price but also in the trading of its debt. The FT points out that “Tesla’s eight-year bond maturing in 2025 traded on Wednesday at 87.6 cents to the dollar, the lowest since issuance. The yield has surged to 7.5 percent from 6.59 percent on Monday.”Liam Denning of Bloomberg Gadfly writes:The fallout from Facebook’s Cambridge Analytica scandal has spread to Twitter.The stock tumbled 12 percent Tuesday after Citron Research’s Andrew Left said he was betting against the social media company because of its vulnerability to regulation around how it handles user data.But analysts at Barclays disagree. They argue in a recent note to clients that Twitter’s data business likely won’t be impacted much by any regulation on its use of user data. The credit reporting company named Mark Begor, a private equity executive who once led General Electric’s credit card business, as its new chief executive.Mr. Begor, 59, takes over for Paulino do Rego Barros Jr., who has filled the role on an interim basis since September, when Richard F. Smith stepped down after a data breach exposed sensitive personal information, including Social Security numbers, of 148 million people.Mr. Begor will start at Equifax on April 16.About Mr. Begor• The 59-year-old is a managing director at the private equity firm Warburg Pincus. He is also a member of the board at the credit-scoring company FICO.• Mr. Begor spent 35 years at General Electric, where his duties included leading the conglomerate’s real-estate investment and energy management units. For nine years, he was president and chief executive of the company’s consumer credit business, which was later spun off as Synchrony Financial.His pay packageEquifax said it would give Mr. Begor stock and options valued at $17 million this year and an annual salary and bonus of up to $4.5 million.President Trump has scored a significant trade deal with South Korea.But with Mr. Trump preparing to meet with North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un — who just took an armored train trip to Beijing — and the North apparently pressing on with nuclear developments, an “America first” trade stance was far from the only thing pushing the South to sign. More from Michael D. Shear and Alan Rappeport:The Trump administration continues to ramp up its trade rhetoric with China. Unidentified sources told Bloomberg that it is considering invoking an emergency law to restrict Chinese investments in sensitive U.S. tech. A separate plan to enact tariffs on $60 billion of Chinese goods has left companies wondering which industries will be targeted. Other Asian countries increasingly fear being caught in the crossfire of a trade war, the WSJ reports.And nations are already reacting to Trump’s trade moves, erecting  barriers to stop the steel and aluminum that faces tariffs in the U.S. being dumped in their markets.Against this background, NXP sold its 40 percent stake in a Chinese joint venture on chip design.Companies like Facebook, Amazon and Alphabet have delivered some of the best returns to investors in recent years, powered by the achievements and the promise of social media and artificial intelligence.But that confidence is evaporating, as investors brace for intensified regulatory scrutiny across the industry. Tech stocks took a pummeling yesterday and in early European trading.Twitter dropped 12 percent after Andrew Left’s Citron Research said it was shorting the company.Critic’s corner: The “sector’s growing clout over everyday life also raises the risks of what can go wrong,” Dan Gallagher argues at WSJ’s Heard on the Street.The public outcry over Facebook’s data and privacy settings has grown loud enough that Mark Zuckerberg now says he’s willing to testify to Congress. The company is on a hiring spree for lobbyists, too, and unnamed sources say it’s putting off the promotion of new home products.The man who started all this, the Cambridge Analytica whistle-blower Christopher Wylie, spoke to British lawmakers on Tuesday and revealed that an employee of Palantir Technologies had suggested that Cambridge Analytica build an app to gain access to Facebook networks. Palantir was co-founded by Peter Thiel, who sits on the Facebook board.Separately, New Zealand’s privacy commissioner has accused Facebook of breaking a law by refusing to give a man information about him held in other users’ accounts. Fair housing groups are suing over ad targeting, saying Facebook still lets advertisers discriminate. And three Facebook Messenger users are suing on privacy grounds.Nvidia — the chip maker whose autonomous-vehicle technology is used by Volkswagen, Tesla, Audi and hundreds of other firms — said it would halt its own tests on self-driving cars, after an autonomous Uber vehicle struck and killed a pedestrian in Arizona. Its shares dropped 7.8 percent.Here’s Roger Lanctot, an automotive technology analyst with Strategy Analytics:Tesla also tumbled 8.2 percent, after the National Transportation Safety Board said it was conducting its second crash investigation of the year involving one of the company’s cars. There’s also anxiety about whether it will hit production goals.Uber said it would not renew its California permit for self-driving vehicle tests until investigations were complete in Arizona. And it’s facing questions over a decision to scale back on safety sensors.But Waymo said it still intended to put thousands of self-driving cars — customized Jaguar I-Paces, to be precise — on the road over the next two years.Critic’s corner: Timothy B. Lee argues in Ars Technica that Uber should sell its self-driving project, which needed a firm with a “methodical, safety-oriented culture.”The tech flyaround• Uber has settled a discrimination lawsuit from three female software engineers for $10 million. (Recode)• Ransomware has hobbled the city government in Atlanta. (NYT)• Apple unveiled a new iPad aimed at classrooms, where Google has raced ahead. (NYT)• Oracle won a federal appeal in its multibillion-dollar copyright infringement claim against Google, in a way that could make software developers easier to sue. (WSJ)• Google bought the GIF platform Tenor. (Verge)• Snapchat is building a way for people to use their account with third-party apps, Facebook-style. (Recode)• Robert Mercer, of Renaissance and Cambridge Analytica fame, is also a volunteer police officer in Lake Arthur, N.M. (Bloomberg)• The former Supreme Court justice John Paul Stevens has called for the Second Amendment to be repealed, in an NYT Op-Ed. Bloomberg looked at how the bankruptcy of the gun maker Remington Outdoor would affect the people suing it for as much as $500 million. And the N.R.A. said it accepted funds from foreign sources, but did not spend them on election campaigns.• At least 12 states say they would sue if the Trump administration seeks to add a question about citizenship to the 2020 census. A less accurate census — if, say, fewer immigrants were to respond — could distort both government spending and the House of Representatives.• The F.B.I. found continuing ties between Russian intelligence and a business associate of the former Trump campaign manager Paul Manafort, according to court documents filed by the special counsel’s team. (WaPo)• A Republican plan for the midterm elections: more tax cuts. (Politico)The $200 billion solar power project would be the largest in the world and could help Saudi Arabia lessen its dependence on oil.But Jenny Chase, head of solar analysis at BNEF, told Bloomberg: “It is worth noting that many of these memorandums of understanding do not result in anything happening.”Saudi officials were in New York as part of a tour by Prince Mohammed bin Salman of Saudi Arabia, who spoke to the NYT, urging a tough line on Iran. And Saudi Arabia’s sovereign wealth fund said it was considering opening offices around the world.Deals flyaround• Takeda Pharmaceutical said it was considering a bid for Shire that could improve its position in drugs for cancer, gastrointestinal disease and nervous system ailments. (Bloomberg)• Potential bidders for GlaxoSmithKline’s health nutrition business could include Nestlé, Kraft Heinz and Unilever, unnamed sources say. (Reuters)• The real estate broker Cushman & Wakefield is interviewing I.P.O. advisers, unnamed sources say. (Bloomberg)• Tyson Foods has hired Goldman Sachs to explore the sale of its pizza crust business. (FT)• In a cross-examination during their big merger case, the lead lawyer for AT&T and Time Warner pushed back against the description of Time Warner’s content as “must-have.” (CNN)• The Carolina Panthers football team could fetch a record sale price of about $2.5 billion. (NYT)Books are on hold and deals are being canceled as the publishing sector grapples with accusations of sexual harassment by authors and others.But the response has not been universal, as publishers weigh lost profits against reputational risks in an industry dominated by women.Separately, former employees at Wynn Resorts said that managers had for years ignored or dismissed complaints about Steve Wynn’s conduct toward women. A former Miramax employee appeared before British lawmakers today to seek a change in the law on nondisclosure agreements.• The chief executive of Deutsche Bank, whoever it is, will face a challenge regaining investors’ trust: its share price is less than 40 percent of the net worth stated on its balance sheet and it relies a lot on potentially unpredictable Wall Street revenue.• Wu Xiaihui, former chairman of the Chinese insurer Anbang, went on trial in Shanghai. (FT)• A key player at the birth of Berkshire Hathaway’s health venture with Amazon and JPMorgan: the Berkshire investment manager Todd Combs. (Bloomberg)• The former Lloyds Banking Group chief Eric Daniels has won a legal battle over a bonus worth $2.1 million. It was withheld from him after the bank needed a government bailout. (Times of London)• Netflix’s talent hunting is pushing up Hollywood salaries. (Bloomberg)• How much would a Warren Buffett investment help G.E.? (Bloomberg Gadfly)Know someone who would enjoy this newsletter? Tell them to sign up here.You can find live updates throughout the day at nytimes.com/dealbook.We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bizday@nytimes.com.SAN FRANCISCO — Facebook employees were in an uproar on Friday over a leaked 2016 memo from a top executive defending the social network’s growth at any cost — even if it caused deaths from a terrorist attack that was organized on the platform.In the memo, Andrew Bosworth, a Facebook vice president, wrote, “Maybe someone dies in a terrorist attack coordinated on our tools. And still we connect people. The ugly truth is that we believe in connecting people so deeply that anything that allows us to connect more people more often is *de facto* good.”Mr. Bosworth and Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, have since disavowed the memo, which was published on Thursday by BuzzFeed News.But the fallout at the Silicon Valley company has been wide. According to two Facebook employees, workers have been calling on internal message boards for a hunt to find those who leak to the media. Some have questioned whether Facebook has been transparent enough with its users and with journalists, said the employees, who asked not to be identified for fear of retaliation. Many are also concerned over what might leak next and are deleting old comments or messages that might come across as controversial or newsworthy, they said.The brouhaha follows a period of intense scrutiny for Facebook and questions over what its responsibilities are to its more than 2.2 billion users. The company has been grappling this month with revelations that a British political consulting firm, Cambridge Analytica, improperly harvested data from 50 million of the social network’s users. Mr. Zuckerberg has since been on an apology tour over data privacy and is expected to testify before lawmakers in Washington.Facebook did not respond to a request for comment over employees’ reaction to the leaked memo.In the aftermath, some Facebook executives have taken to Twitter for a public charm offensive, sending pithy phrases and emoticons to reporters who cover the company. Adam Mosseri, Facebook’s head of news feed, in recent days wrote unprompted to a BuzzFeed editor and to its chief executive reminiscing and telling a story about his mother. He also wrote to a reporter from the Verge tech site about the songs played at his wedding reception.In some of his tweets, Mr. Mosseri also defended Facebook. When writers from Vox and BuzzFeed tweeted that they noticed that stories critical of Facebook were receiving surprisingly low levels of traffic on Facebook, Mr. Mosseri jumped in.“We 100% do not take any action on stories for being critical of us,” he tweeted.Mr. Bosworth, the author of the 2016 memo, also took to Twitter. Late Thursday, he said he did not agree with what he wrote in the memo “and I didn’t agree with it even when I wrote it.” He added that “the purpose of this post, like many others I have written internally, was to bring to the surface issues I felt deserved more discussion with the broader company.”After BuzzFeed published the memo, Mr. Bosworth deleted it from an internal message board where it had originally been posted. In a statement to BuzzFeed, Mr. Zuckerberg praised Mr. Bosworth as “a talented leader who says many provocative things” and said that he and most people at Facebook did not agree with the memo and that the company had realized that it could not just be about connecting people.Facebook employees said on Friday that discussions were raging across the company regarding the merits of the post. Some called for executives to aggressively pursue action against those leaking to the media, said two Facebook employees, as well as for the company to do more to screen for potential whistle-blowers during the hiring process.At least one former Facebook employee, Alec Muffett, wrote on Twitter that Mr. Bosworth’s memo was responsible for his decision to leave the company.“Between overwork and leadership direction evidenced thusly, I could never stay,” wrote Mr. Muffett, who formerly worked as a Facebook engineer.“There are some amazing engineers working at Facebook, folks who care deeply about user privacy, security, and how people will use the code that they write,” Mr. Muffett said later in a message. “Alas this episode may not help” to achieve more transparent internal product discussion, he said.Eric H. Holder Jr., the United States attorney general for six years under President Barack Obama, stepped away from public service in 2015 but has since emerged as a bulwark against the Trump administration, taking a leading role in challenging the president’s policies in court and trying to chip away at the Republicans’ grip on state governments. Mr. Holder discussed his efforts to fight Republican gerrymandering, whether Facebook should be regulated and the potential legacy of Mr. Trump’s presidency in a wide-ranging TimesTalks conversation with the reporter Alexander Burns on Wednesday night in New York.Here are the takeaways.After the Trump administration announced this week that it would add a question about citizenship to the 2020 census, Mr. Holder said he planned to sue to block the change on behalf of the National Democratic Redistricting Committee, which he chairs. The census aims to count everyone who resides in the country, whether they are citizens or not, and Mr. Holder echoed the concerns expressed by several states this week that the citizenship question could reduce the responses from noncitizens and even legal immigrants.He said his lawsuit would be aided by Mr. Trump’s Twitter utterances.“This is one of those incidences where I think the president’s tweets and public statements will become relevant,” Mr. Holder, 67, said. “To show the true intent — that it is not as benign as they would make it out to be. Through the words of Donald Trump and through the tweets of Donald Trump, you’ll see what the true intention was of the administration.”Normally, he noted, it would be difficult to argue in court that the government pushed a policy with a malicious intent. But Mr. Trump’s tweets provide plenty of material for lawsuits, Mr. Holder said.“It is certainly the gift that keeps on giving,” he said.Mr. Holder conceded that he prefers Twitter to Facebook but occasionally catches a glimpse of Facebook when his wife signs on. But he said he had been following the recent news that a British political consulting firm, Cambridge Analytica, improperly harvested the information of 50 million Facebook users.That security breach, along with the social network’s role in spreading Russian-backed propaganda during the presidential election, bolstered an argument for regulating Facebook, Mr. Holder said.“There needs to be a certain degree of freedom,” he said. “We don’t want to stifle the creativity that comes from those platforms.”But he added: “There is a way in which we have to think of these platforms as communication companies. What then does that mean in terms of how they should be regulated?”Mr. Holder, who served as the attorney general from February 2009 to April 2015, said he was stunned by the support Mr. Trump still enjoyed in some circles after a pornographic-film star and a former Playboy model claimed they had sexual relationships with him.“I find it hard to believe the conversations that we have about the conduct of this president. They are mind-blowing,” he said. “I think to myself, You gave my guy grief because he wore a tan suit.”Mr. Holder said that if the same allegations of extramarital affairs had been made against Mr. Obama or President George W. Bush, their presidencies would have been over. “I just don’t understand how this has not had the reaction generated that would have been generated by any other president,” he said.Mr. Trump has nominated Mike Pompeo, the director of the C.I.A., to be the next secretary of state and named a veteran of the spy agency, Gina Haspel, as the next director. Both nominations require Senate confirmation, and Ms. Haspel will certainly face questions about her work as a clandestine officer in the agency’s counterterrorism operations. She oversaw a secret prison in Thailand involved in the rendition, detention and interrogation of detainees.In 2012, Mr. Holder effectively closed that dark chapter in the C.I.A.’s history, announcing that a three-year Justice Department investigation into brutal interrogations was ending without a prosecution. The decision outraged some liberals.On Wednesday night, Mr. Holder said that Ms. Haspel would have to answer tough questions — and that the public deserved to know more about the country’s enhanced interrogation program. He said that parts of the Justice Department report and a separate Senate investigation into the program should be declassified.“The American people need to know exactly what happened during that time period,” he said.Responding to recent calls for a repeal of the Second Amendment, Mr. Holder said such an effort was impracticable but offered four suggestions to address what he called a “gun violence epidemic in the United States.” His remarks came days after John Paul Stevens, a retired associate justice of the United States Supreme Court, wrote an Op-Ed in The Times advocating repeal.Assault weapons should be banned, as well as higher-capacity magazines, Mr. Holder said. Background checks should be expanded for prospective gun buyers, and the government should reinstate the funding of studies on gun violence by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.“Compare us to any other nation, and we are just off the charts when it comes to mass shootings and the number of people killed through the use of firearms,” Mr. Holder said. “We have to do something about it.”WEYMOUTH, Mass. — Kyle Corkum imagines a “smart city” with futuristic amenities like driverless shuttle services, heated sidewalks and a super-resilient energy grid that keeps humming through the harshest of storms.As chief executive of LStar Ventures, a developer of planned communities, he has a chance to build the neighborhood of his dreams from the ground up on the site of a long-shuttered naval air station in this town just 12 miles south of Boston’s booming technology hub.LStar, based in Raleigh, N.C., has enlisted General Electric as its partner. Because they are starting from scratch, Mr. Corkum said, the companies can embed smart technology into the energy, water, lighting and transportation systems that will serve the community.The project comes at a time when the tech industry is under intense scrutiny. Facebook is struggling with revelations that Cambridge Analytica, a political data firm, improperly harvested private information from 50 million of the social network’s users. And Uber’s travails include a pedestrian death caused by one of its autonomous vehicles last month.Still, LStar is pushing ahead with the smart city, called Union Point. Plans include thousands of housing units and millions of square feet of high-tech commercial space on about 1,500 acres that extend into the neighboring towns of Rockland and Abington. The community’s glass towers, public plazas, clustered housing, scattered parks and retail zones will be contained within 500 acres, leaving the rest as dedicated open space.So far, the community consists of about 1,200 occupied single-family homes, townhouses and apartments, as well as a nearly completed $28 million sports complex with a miniature replica of Fenway Park. A cavernous aircraft hangar will be renovated for use as the centerpiece for a downtown district with shops, restaurants and open spaces with public programming.General Electric will use Union Point as a laboratory for testing new products and as a showroom for working systems. Eric Gebhardt, the strategic technology officer at GE Power, said the community’s energy plan will include micro grid technology, renewable generation and power storage. The company will also install “intelligent” lighting — streetlights with sensors that can track sound, light and other conditions. The data can be used to monitor traffic, help drivers find parking spaces and alert law enforcement if a gun is fired.G.E. has piloted some of its smart products in existing cities, but Union Point is an unusual opportunity because most of the infrastructure does not exist yet and the developer is open to experimentation, Mr. Gebhardt said.LStar plans to open an innovation center in the air station’s old power plant. The center has expressed an interest in featuring an interactive planning tool developed by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology City Science Group called CityScope, which could aid in Union Point’s evolution by allowing users to visualize and explore trade-offs around factors like density, transportation and walkability, said David Rose, a researcher and lecturer at MIT’s Media Lab.LStar wants “the center to be a showcase for what the city could be, a place to monitor what it is becoming, and a place to ask existential questions like, ‘Could it be more inclusive, say, or energy efficient?’” Mr. Rose said.LStar also has an agreement with Optimus Ride, an autonomous vehicle start-up in Boston, to set up a self-driving vehicle service at Union Point. The company is already testing its electric vehicles at the property.Union Point’s first commercial tenant is expected this spring, when Prodrive Technologies, a Dutch company that develops and manufactures products for the automotive, medical and other industries, will break ground on its 60,000-square-foot United States headquarters. The site’s proximity to Boston, access to commuter rail service and ample room for expansion were crucial to the firm’s location decision, said Roy Willems, the company’s general manager of United States operations. He said Prodrive expected to build a second 200,000-square-foot building within three years, and increase its work force to roughly 300 people.LStar had to persuade the three host communities to approve critical zoning changes before it could move forward with the project. They also granted the developer considerable latitude over the design and layout of the community, which will take shape over 15 to 20 years.“The three towns recognized an opportunity to do something quite extraordinary” on a site where previous development plans stalled, said David P. Manfredi, a founding principal at Elkus Manfredi Architects, which helped create the master plan for Union Point. “This is an alternative to what could have been suburban sprawl.”Union Point promises to bring badly needed tax revenue to Weymouth, said the town’s mayor, Robert L. Hedlund. “It’s the commercial build-out that we’re lusting after,” he said.Still, similarly ambitious smart city projects have proved perilous. Mr. Rose cited Songdo, a smart city nearing completion in South Korea, as a prime example. The city boasts advanced connectivity, but it has so far failed to meet expectations in attracting international businesses and residents.“What they got wrong was any sort of sense of streetscape,” said Mr. Rose, who has visited Songdo. “There’s no sense of patina, no authentic street life. It’s super sterile. It was built as this fantasy of the future, but it’s a place that humans don’t want to occupy.”The integration of technology into urban planning has prompted questions about how the data being collected will be used. In Toronto, for example, Sidewalk Labs, a subsidiary of Alphabet, the parent company of Google, attracted considerable publicity when it was selected last year to help create a smart neighborhood of sorts in a waterfront district called Quayside. Some local officials and critics are questioning whether the deal gives too much authority to Sidewalk Labs without putting limitations on Google’s collection and use of data.The need for greater regulation of driverless vehicles has also come up for debate after the death last month of a woman who was struck by one of Uber’s self-driving cars in Tempe, Ariz.“Very few local governments have thought through the long list of public- and private-sector values and concerns that should be deployed to constrain” the use of autonomous cars, as well as the technologies being used to monitor city streets, said Susan Crawford, a Harvard Law School professor. “Once you’ve given a developer license to deploy total surveillance, with no public limitations, you’re done.”LStar has considerable leeway to test technologies at Union Point. The developer is purposely holding on to its roads, rather than asking for them to be made public ways, to maintain flexibility in testing autonomous vehicles, lighting and other technologies, said Robert Luongo, Weymouth’s director of planning and community development.“If these were public ways, we might not be able to give them that flexibility,” he said.Mr. Corkum said retaining ownership of the roads would enable them to play with designs for amenities like drop-off areas for driverless shuttles and heated sidewalks. “It’s better for us to stay in this testing phase until we have good workable solutions,” he said.State oversight of autonomous vehicles applies only once there is public use, he said. Even then, the rules are vague. Ryan Chin, the chief executive of Optimus Ride, said his company would adhere to the same high-level safety standards and testing protocols at Union Point that it followed for testing driverless cars in Boston’s Seaport neighborhood.As for privacy concerns, Mr. Corkum said that he believed in setting boundaries on data collection and use. There is value in using technology to improve quality of life by, for instance, alleviating traffic jams, but he said he was wary of falling prey to a “preoccupation with optimization.”The company is working with law firms and consultants on operating guidelines for gathering and anonymizing data and ensuring it cannot be hacked or used to invade privacy, he said.“I don’t like the Big Brother notion that we know everything about you,” he said. “We will use data for the benefit of the group, not in a way to leverage the group.” (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• During five trips to Iraq, Times journalists scoured former offices of the Islamic State, gathering more than 15,000 pages of documents abandoned by the militants as their “caliphate” crumbled.We’ve just published the results of our yearlong investigation. It shows that ISIS, known for its brutality, was also effective at wielding power through paperwork. Here’s a closer look at some of the documents we collected, including tax collection forms, religious edicts and the will of a suicide bomber.We also have a new audio series, “Caliphate,” which follows our reporter Rukmini Callimachi as she covers the Islamic State and the fall of Mosul, Iraq. Listen to a preview here.• Separately, President Trump wants to bring home the 2,000 U.S. troops in Syria. He dropped plans for an immediate withdrawal, but instructed military commanders to wrap up the mission within a few months.• The latest dispute between the U.S. and China has been defined by reciprocity, with each side announcing matching tariffs.But if things continue to escalate, Beijing will have less room to maneuver and could resort to more unconventional measures, our senior economics correspondent writes.For now, the White House is trying to calm fears of a possible trade war. Administration officials hinted on Wednesday that tariffs outlined earlier in the week might never go into effect, but reiterated that China must stop what President Trump calls unfair trading practices.• Here’s how the showdown could affect U.S. manufacturers.• Our correspondent in Mexico spoke with some of the Central American migrants cited by President Trump to justify sending troops to the southern border. (The caravans have also excited the conservative news media.)The group of more than 1,000 people, mostly women and children, is fleeing violence and poverty, but its members face an uncertain future. “Who wants to leave their country, the comfort of their home, their families?” one asked.• White House officials confirmed plans on Wednesday to mobilize the National Guard to the border with Mexico, but gave few details about timing, the number of troops or their mission there.• The country’s top court ruled today that former President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva can be sent to prison while he appeals his conviction on corruption and money laundering charges.Mr. da Silva, 72, who was president from 2003 to 2011, was sentenced last year to almost 10 years in prison. His chosen successor, Dilma Rousseff, was removed from office in 2016.• Mr. da Silva is the front-runner in the presidential election in October, and the court’s decision raises questions about the legitimacy of the vote.• Facebook said that the data of up to 87 million users may have been improperly shared with a political consulting firm, far more than an earlier estimate of 50 million.The company’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, is scheduled to testify to Congress next week. Here’s a guide to our coverage of the Cambridge Analytica story.• Thousands of Google employees are urging their chief executive to end the company’s involvement in a Pentagon program to improve the targeting of drone strikes.• “You can’t be serious!” That was the response of Sinclair Broadcast Group’s chairman to criticism of a script about media bias that dozens of TV anchors at its stations were instructed to read out.• The former Fox News host Bill O’Reilly and his lawyers worked hard to silence the women who accused him of sexual harassment. Now a judge has made the settlements public.• U.S. stocks were up on Wednesday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets today.Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• Flying somewhere? Take advantage of the changes at airports.• How to respond when a colleague is harassing women.• Recipe of the day: Take a break from the usual stir fry, with braised eggplant, pork and mushrooms.Our journalists recommend these great pieces:• Cambridge Analytica’s parent company apparently helped Rodrigo Duterte win the Philippine presidential election, our former Europe Morning Briefing writer, Patrick Boehler, noted on Twitter. [South China Morning Post]• “As a onetime employee of Blockbuster Video, I was tickled to learn that a video store in Bend, Ore., is still operating under the name of the chain.“It’s the last one in the lower 48 states (there are six others in Alaska), and how they continue to do business is fascinating.” [GeekWire]— Michael Roston, senior staff editor, Science• Putting out a yearbook after a school shootingAfter the deadly attack at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High in February, the staff of the Aerie, the school’s yearbook, had to decide how to honor the 17 people who died.“This has to be remembered for the rest of our lives,” one of the yearbook’s editors told our reporter.• Best sellers, via the Oval OfficePresidents past, present and future are represented on the latest hardcover nonfiction best-seller list.It includes a collection of Obama-era photographs, an inside account of the Trump White House, a book about the meaning of faith by former President Jimmy Carter, and an open letter to whoever becomes the first female president.• Are you a teacher?We want to hear from you. Tell us what you think about the protests over pay and benefits, and what conditions are like at your school.• Best of late-night TVMike Myers — in the form of his “Austin Powers” character Dr. Evil — told Jimmy Fallon that the wall between the U.S. and Mexico was actually his idea. Except, “I wanted it to be a moat, filled with spiky blowfish.”• Quotation of the day“Tariffs are seen as a direct slap in the face, and it will be very difficult for the Chinese government to sit back and take those blows without retaliating.”— Eswar Prasad, a professor of international trade at Cornell University, on the risk of a full-blown trade war between the U.S. and China.• The Times, in other wordsHere’s an image of today’s front page, and links to our Opinion content and crossword puzzles.We begin today with a shimmy, or maybe the turkey trot. Perhaps the bunny hug is more your style.Arthur Murray, an immigrant baker’s son who brought ballroom dancing into people’s living rooms, was born this week in 1895. His mission, he said, was to use dance to “bring ease for universal heartache, loneliness and desolation.”As a tall, gangly boy from the Bronx, he discovered in high school that he had a flair for dancing and threw himself into the ballroom dance craze of the early 20th century.He worked in an architecture firm by day and taught lessons by night. He eventually turned the lessons into a lucrative mail order magazine business and dance studio franchises around the world.Mr. Murray’s unique method was influenced by his time in design — clearly drawn diagrams of footprints instructed students how and where to move their feet.He also took advantage of regular radio programming, and he had a weekly variety TV program, “The Arthur Murray Party.” That way, anyone could dance with Mr. Murray, anywhere.For Mr. Murray, who died in 1991, a bad dancer never blames his partner.“To find fault with your partner’s dancing,” he  once said, “is the best way of advertising the fact that you are just learning to dance.”Remy Tumin contributed reporting._____Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays and updated all morning. Browse past briefings here.Sign up here to get it by email in the Australian, Asian, European or American morning. To receive an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights, sign up here.Check out our full range of free newsletters here.What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.SAN FRANCISCO — Ryan Knight, a Democratic activist in Los Angeles, called for a boycott of Apple in February because it hadn’t responded to calls to delete a channel from the National Rifle Association from its streaming-video service after the Parkland, Fla., school shooting.“Dear @Apple,” Mr. Knight wrote on Twitter. “Your silence is deafening. #BoycottApple.” More than 330 accounts retweeted the message.How did Mr. Knight post the message? He used an iPhone.As the reach and influence of Silicon Valley’s tech giants have increased, so have the calls to boycott their products and services. The problem is that pulling off a boycott is not exactly easy: The tech companies’ products are so pervasive that they are difficult to avoid.That issue was crystallized in recent weeks with Facebook. Hundreds of people deleted their accounts after revelations that the political-data firm Cambridge Analytica had improperly harvested the information of 50 million Facebook users. Yet many of those same people promptly instructed their friends to find them on Instagram, which is owned by — you guessed it — Facebook.“It’s exactly the same company. I realize it’s ridiculous,” said Sachi Cunningham, a documentary filmmaker in San Francisco who deactivated her Facebook last week and shifted her attention to Instagram, where, she said, the conversation is less toxic.Ms. Cunningham, who has freelanced for The New York Times, added that she had immediately begun missing Facebook as a research tool for her documentaries. “I don’t know if I can get out of the ecosystem,” she said.People looking to punish major tech companies by abstaining from their products have been bedeviled time and again by the difficulty in escaping them. After Google fired an engineer, James Damore, for criticizing the company’s diversity efforts last year, hundreds of people on social media called for a boycott of the company. But an analysis of nearly 7,000 tweets using the hashtag #BoycottGoogle since August showed that 26 percent of the tweets came from devices using Google’s Android software, according to Keyhole, a social-media research firm.One Twitter account named Milton Prescott tweeted on Aug. 8: “Google’s firing of James Damore proves his point completely. I will no longer be using Google for any services. #BoycottGoogle.” The tweet came from an Android device. A message to the account went unreturned.Even Breitbart is running into the same dilemma. The conservative website is planning to host a panel on how tech platforms like Facebook suppress conservative voices — and it said it would livestream the discussion on Facebook. Breitbart didn’t respond to a request for comment.Marisa Richardson, a program manager at a life-sciences company, said she began boycotting Amazon recently after learning that it offered the NRA channel on its streaming-video service. So when she needed laundry detergent, she avoided the e-commerce site and instead braved the crowds and traffic — and spent a few dollars more — at a nearby Target.But a few days later she shopped at the Whole Foods near her home in Oakland, Calif. “I completely forgot that they’re owned by Amazon,” she said.After the shooting in Parkland in February, gun-control activists called for a boycott of certain Apple and Amazon services because they hosted the NRA channel.People used the hashtag #March1NRABoycott to spread the message on social media. An analysis of about 58,500 tweets with the hashtag showed that nearly half came from an iPhone or an iPad, according to Keyhole. Those included popular tweets using the #March1NRABoycott hashtag from the actress Alyssa Milano.“Had I sent the same tweets from an Android phone, the same issue would apply. There is an NRATV app for Android phones,” Ms. Milano said through a spokeswoman. “We are only just beginning to understand how these companies have infiltrated not only our ideologies, but also our lives in the most in-depth way imaginable.”Nearly a third of the 4,700 tweets using the #BoycottApple hashtag since August came from iPhones, according to Keyhole.“I do have an iPhone, but as a customer of Apple’s, am I not allowed to hold them accountable?” Mr. Knight, the activist who used an iPhone to call for an Apple boycott, said in an interview.Eddy Cue, a senior executive at Apple, recently said that the NRA channel didn’t violate the company’s policies. Facebook, Google and Amazon didn’t respond to requests for comment.Many of those who recently abandoned their Facebook accounts are still in the company’s orbit, not only with Instagram but also with the company’s popular messaging apps WhatsApp and Messenger.When Cher recently deleted her Facebook page, she said on Twitter, “2day I did something VERY HARD 4 me.” But her Instagram account, with 768,000 followers, was still active.Likewise, Elon Musk, chief executive of SpaceX and Tesla, deleted the Facebook pages of both companies — but left their pages and his personal account active on Instagram. The photo-sharing platform, he said on Twitter, is fine “so long as it stays fairly independent.”Stephen Cox, 39, a woodworker in Los Angeles, recently posted on Facebook that he was deactivating his account in favor of Instagram. When someone commented that the two sites were owned by the same company, he replied, “It’s a double-edged sword, but for me one edge is slightly more blunt than the other.”Instagram has proved an effective hedge for Facebook against people losing interest or trust in its main site. While the percentage of American adults who use Facebook has remained flat at 68 percent since 2016, according to a January survey of 2,002 American adults by the Pew Research Center, Instagram use rose to 35 percent from 28 percent over that period. Instagram is also more popular with younger people than older people, according to the survey.Rayven Bruzzese, 26, a sign-language student in Philadelphia, said she had been a frequent user of Facebook for years but deleted her account in March because she found it upsetting and a drain on her time. Now she spends her time on Instagram.While she acknowledged the irony of moving to another Facebook-owned service, she said her options were limited. Few of her friends are on Twitter, and many have stopped using Snapchat.“Where am I supposed to go?” she said. “I wish there was something else.”Each week, Kevin Roose, technology columnist at The New York Times, discusses developments in the tech industry, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here.It’s hard to imagine now, but at one point, long ago, Facebook did not monopolize the entire tech news cycle — a heady and innocent era when you could read an entire day’s news without encountering the words “Cambridge Analytica” or “third-party developers.”I confess that, like many of you, I have been obsessed with the fallout from Facebook’s latest privacy scandal, to the point that I had a stress dream that I overslept and missed covering Mark Zuckerberg’s testimony on Capitol Hill next week. (Related: I need to get out more, and possibly take up yoga.)But despite the wall-to-wall news of the past few weeks, lots of important things are happening in the tech world that don’t involve Facebook. So let’s run down a few of them?I thought this article by Scott Shane and Daisuke Wakabayashi, about thousands of Google employees who are protesting the company’s involvement in a Pentagon A.I. program, was fascinating on a number of levels.First, it’s an unusually clear example of the double-edged nature of artificial intelligence. Google has spent billions of dollars teaching computers to play Go, drive cars and translate languages on the fly. The company has been extremely proud of its advances in machine learning, even releasing some of its tools to the public via open-source frameworks like TensorFlow, which provides a fascinating contrast to what’s happening inside the company now. When its image-classification algorithms are used to spot tumors on radiology scans, Google puts out a press release, and engineers cheer. But when these same types of algorithms are used by the Pentagon to improve the accuracy of drone strikes, it’s a moral outrage.Yonatan Zunger, a former Google engineer, had an interesting op-ed the other day in The Boston Globe about the “reckonings” that various scientific fields have undergone, as the scientists who develop powerful tools begin to see how those tools can be used for evil purposes. He used the examples of the atomic bomb, which forever changed the way that physics was taught in universities, and dynamite, which made chemists aware of the consequences of their expertise. It’s not hard to see A.I. as a similar kind of turning point for computer scientists — and if it is, the Google-Pentagon issue might be the first of many similar fights.Second, the Google-Pentagon incident is a revealing story about the leverage that Silicon Valley engineers have over their companies. Because the labor market for engineers in the Bay Area is so tight, and because companies live and die on their ability to attract and retain talent, these employees have much more say in how a company like Google governs itself than, say, regulators or outside activists. If an antiwar group protests outside Google’s headquarters, it’s an annoyance. But if 3,000 engineers walk out, it’s a crisis. And as the tech industry goes through its moral reckoning, executives of these companies should bear in mind that their biggest risk isn’t regulation, it’s rebellion from within.I’ve also been following the feud between Amazon and President Trump this week, which has led to a bull market for explainers about the business models of the United States Postal Service. My colleague Nick Wingfield wrote that, contra President Trump, the available evidence suggests that “Amazon has been a boon to the Postal Service.” But Vox’s Jen Kirby added that, because the exact details of the contract between Amazon and the Postal Service aren’t known, it’s possible that President Trump is partly right: “Maybe the U.S.P.S. isn’t actually making the best deals.” Meanwhile, Matt Stoller, a fellow at the Open Markets Institute, says President Trump is “actually right” that Amazon is ripping off the federal government through its U.S.P.S. contracts.I’m a nonexpert on the subject of parcel shipping, so my opinion on Amazon’s the -U.S.P.S. probably isn’t worth one first-class stamp. But it’s possible, and maybe plausible, that all of these analyses are partly correct — that the Postal Service benefits from Amazon’s dominance, and that Amazon is getting a sweetheart deal that should be re-examined. Anyway, Amazon’s stock dipped sharply after President Trump started tweeting angry things about it, but it has now recovered to its pre-tweetstorm levels, meaning that investors may be as confused as I am.Last, and most obvious, the horrific shooting at YouTube on Tuesday, which injured three people and left the company badly shaken. As more details have emerged on Nasim Najafi Aghdam, whom the police have identified as the attacker, it has become increasingly clear that this was a new kind of violence — an act of revenge by an internet creator against the platform that she felt controlled her economic destiny. As my colleagues Nellie Bowles and Jack Nicas wrote, “Ms. Aghdam’s complaints echoed what a wide range of YouTube posters — from self-described animal rights activists like her to right-wing political provocateurs — have increasingly been protesting over the last year.”It’s a tragic reminder that social platforms aren’t just websites anymore. They’re powerful economies unto themselves, and even seemingly minor policy decisions can alter the lives of millions of people, a few of whom might be disturbed enough to act on their darkest impulses.Kevin Roose writes a column called The Shift and is a writer-at-large for The New York Times Magazine. You can follow him on Twitter here: @kevinroose.Amazon ran a commercial on this year’s Super Bowl that pretended its digital assistant Alexa had temporarily lost her voice. It featured celebrities like Rebel Wilson, Cardi B and even the company’s chief executive, Jeff Bezos.While the ad riffed on what Alexa can say to users, the more intriguing question may be what she and other digital assistants can hear — especially as more people bring smart speakers into their homes.Amazon and Google, the leading sellers of such devices, say the assistants record and process audio only after users trigger them by pushing a button or uttering a phrase like “Hey, Alexa” or “O.K., Google.” But each company has filed patent applications, many of them still under consideration, that outline an array of possibilities for how devices like these could monitor more of what users say and do. That information could then be used to identify a person’s desires or interests, which could be mined for ads and product recommendations.In one set of patent applications, Amazon describes how a “voice sniffer algorithm” could be used on an array of devices, like tablets and e-book readers, to analyze audio almost in real time when it hears words like “love,” bought” or “dislike.” A diagram included with the application illustrated how a phone call between two friends could result in one receiving an offer for the San Diego Zoo and the other seeing an ad for a Wine of the Month Club membership.Some patent applications from Google, which also owns the smart home product maker Nest Labs, describe how audio and visual signals could be used in the context of elaborate smart home setups.One application details how audio monitoring could help detect that a child is engaging in “mischief” at home by first using speech patterns and pitch to identify a child’s presence, one filing said. A device could then try to sense movement while listening for whispers or silence, and even program a smart speaker to “provide a verbal warning.”A separate application regarding personalizing content for people while respecting their privacy noted that voices could be used to determine a speaker’s mood using the “volume of the user’s voice, detected breathing rate, crying and so forth,” and medical condition “based on detected coughing, sneezing and so forth.”The same application outlines how a device could “recognize a T-shirt on a floor of the user’s closet” bearing Will Smith’s face and combine that with a browser history that shows searches for Mr. Smith “to provide a movie recommendation that displays, ‘You seem to like Will Smith. His new movie is playing in a theater near you.’”In a statement, Amazon said the company took “privacy seriously” and did “not use customers’ voice recordings for targeted advertising.” Amazon said that it filed “a number of forward-looking patent applications that explore the full possibilities of new technology,” and that they “take multiple years to receive and do not necessarily reflect current developments to products and services.”Google said it did not “use raw audio to extrapolate moods, medical conditions or demographic information.” The company added, “All devices that come with the Google Assistant, including Google Home, are designed with user privacy in mind.”Tech companies apply for a dizzying number of patents every year, many of which are never used and are years from even being possible.Still, Jamie Court, the president of Consumer Watchdog, a nonprofit advocacy group in Santa Monica, Calif., which published a study of some of the patent applications in December, said, “When you read parts of the applications, it’s really clear that this is spyware and a surveillance system meant to serve you up to advertisers.”The companies, Mr. Court added, are “basically going to be finding out what our home life is like in qualitative ways.”Google called Consumer Watchdog’s claims “unfounded,” and said, “Prospective product announcements should not necessarily be inferred from our patent applications.”A recent Gallup poll found that 22 percent of Americans used devices like Google Home or Amazon Echo. The growing adoption of smart speakers means that gadgets, some of which contain up to eight microphones and a camera, are being placed in kitchens and bedrooms and used to answer questions, control appliances and make phone calls. Apple recently introduced its own version, called the HomePod.But many consumers are also becoming increasingly nervous that tech companies are eavesdropping on them in order to serve them targeted ads, no matter how often the companies deny it. The recent revelations that a British political data firm, Cambridge Analytica, improperly harvested the information of 50 million Facebook users has only added to the public’s wariness over the collection and use of personal information.Facebook, in fact, had planned to unveil its new internet-connected home products at a developer conference in May, according to Bloomberg News, which reported that the company had scuttled that idea partly in response to the recent fallout.Both Amazon and Google have emphasized that devices with Alexa and Google Assistant store voice recordings from users only after they are intentionally triggered. Amazon’s Echo and its newer smart speakers with screens use lights to show when they are streaming audio to the cloud, and consumers can view and delete their recordings on the Alexa smartphone app or on Amazon’s website (though they are warned online that “may degrade” their experience). Google Home also has a light that indicates when it is recording, and users can similarly see and delete that audio online.Amazon says voice recordings may help fulfill requests and improve its services, while Google says the data helps it learn over time to provide better, more personalized responses.But the ecosystem around voice data is still evolving.Take the thousands of third-party apps developed for Alexa called “skills,” which can be used to play games, dim lights or provide cleaning advice. While Amazon said it didn’t share users’ actual recordings with third parties, its terms of use for Alexa say it may share the content of their requests or information like their ZIP codes. Google says  it will “generally” not provide audio recordings to third-party service providers, but may send transcriptions of what people say.And some devices have already shown that they are capable of recording more than what users expect. Google faced some embarrassment last fall when a batch of Google Home Minis that it distributed at company events and to journalists were almost constantly recording.In a starker example, detectives investigating a death at an Arkansas home sought access to audio on an Echo device in 2016. Amazon resisted, but the recordings were ultimately shared with the permission of the defendant, James Bates. (A judge later dismissed Mr. Bates’s first-degree murder charge based on separate evidence.)Kathleen Zellner, his lawyer, said in an interview that the Echo had been recording more than it was supposed to. Mr. Bates told her that it had been regularly lighting up without being prompted, and had logged conversations that were unrelated to Alexa commands, including a conversation about football in a separate room, she said.“It was just extremely sloppy the way the activation occurred,” Ms. Zellner said.The Electronic Privacy Information Center has recommended more robust disclosure rules for internet-connected devices, including an “algorithmic transparency requirement” that would help people understand how their data was being used and what automated decisions were then being made about them.Sam Lester, the center’s consumer privacy fellow, said he believed that the abilities of new smart home devices highlighted the need for United States regulators to get more involved with how consumer data was collected and used.“A lot of these technological innovations can be very good for consumers,” he said. “But it’s not the responsibility of consumers to protect themselves from these products any more than it’s their responsibility to protect themselves from the safety risks in food and drugs. It’s why we established a Food and Drug Administration years ago.”(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning. Kim Jong-un’s power play, a French march against hate and a Balkan design facepalm. Here’s the latest:• Confident, reasonable — willing to bargain.That’s how North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, came across in his debut as a global statesman — and he did so with a dash of mystery. Here’s how the Chinese and the North Korean news media portrayed the meeting with President Xi Jinping.Mr. Kim’s two-day visit — his first known trip abroad since taking power — was a reminder of how much he has set the agenda in the North Korean nuclear crisis and, our correspondent writes, what a strong hand he has going into negotiations.President Trump was quick to chime in. He posted on Twitter that Mr. Xi told him that the meeting went “very well” and that Mr. Kim “looks forward to his meeting with me.”_____• “In France, we kill grandmothers because they’re Jewish.”Condemning anti-Semitic violence, thousands marched through Paris to honor Mireille Knoll, above, an 85-year-old Holocaust survivor who was murdered in her apartment last week.She was stabbed 11 times and partly burned, and a neighbor is one of the suspects. He reportedly said “God is great” in Arabic during the killing, which the authorities have labeled a hate crime, renewing concerns about a persistent strain of anti-Semitism in France._____• The British authorities said that a poisoned former Russian spy and his daughter, who are at the epicenter of a diplomatic crisis between Russia and the West, had been sickened by a nerve agent on the front door of his house, above, in the cathedral town of Salisbury, England.The announcement narrows the possibilities of how the victims came into contact with Novichok, a lethal toxin developed by Soviet scientists.Separately, outrage continues to mount in Russia as funerals began for the 64 victims of a deadly shopping mall fire in the Siberian city of Kemerovo._____• A lawyer for President Trump broached the idea of pardoning two of his former top advisers, Michael Flynn and Paul Manafort, with their attorneys last year, according to people with knowledge of the talks. But the lawyer, John Dowd, who resigned last week, denied it.Yet the special investigation into Mr. Trump’s ties to Russia continues to gain steam. The U.S. special counsel released a document showing that Rick Gates, a top Trump campaign official, had repeated communications with a business associate tied to Russian intelligence during the final weeks of the 2016 presidential election.Meanwhile, Mr. Trump has chosen his personal physician, Ronny L. Jackson, above, as the new secretary of veterans affairs, replacing David Shulkin. (Finding it hard to keep track of all the Trump administration turnover? Here’s a handy breakdown.)_____• A capital of kitsch. An ambitious building project in Skopje, the capital of Macedonia, was intended to evoke an ancient past.But $750 million, hundreds of new statues and three pirate ships later, the remodeling has become a cautionary tale of Balkan nationalism gone wild._____• Is your waiter rude, or just French?Few cultural stereotypes are more pervasive than the surly French garçon. That perception was even used as a defense in a recent wrongful termination suit in Canada.In the lawsuit, a French waiter who was fired for being combative and aggressive said his former bosses were discriminating against his culture and heritage. (Above, a waiter at a restaurant in Paris.)• Boeing was hit by a cyberattack that some executives say used the same ransomware that struck thousands of computer systems in more than 70 countries last year.• President Trump wants to remake global trade in a matter of months. Here’s how he’s trying to do it.• A top Morgan Stanley broker was repeatedly accused of violence against his ex-wives and girlfriends. Bank managers were told. But he kept his job.• Facebook will introduce a centralized system for its users to control their privacy and security settings in response to an outcry over the way it has handled personal data.• An advertising group that gave Cambridge Analytica a gold prize for its work for the Trump campaign is now urging marketers to reconsider the ethics of how consumer information is collected. (It has yet to rescind the award.)• Saudi Arabia may be changing, but the sudden postponement of its first fashion week suggests bumps in the road.• U.S. stocks were mixed. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.• In Egypt, it’s $3 a vote. With no real challenger in this week’s election, President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi is cajoling, coercing and even paying voters to ensure a credible turnout. Above, a woman with a photo of Mr. Sisi in Cairo. [The New York Times]• Ecuador  cut off internet access — again — for Julian Assange, who lives in the Ecuadorean Embassy in London. The government cited concerns that he was harming the country’s international relationships on social media. [The New York Times]• Just in time for summer, Ireland will be getting its first official nude beach. [BBC]• Immigration has helped bump Germany’s birthrate to its highest in decades. [Politico]• Pope Francis rejected calls to apologize for the Roman Catholic Church’s role in a Canadian school system that tried to eliminate Indigenous culture. Many native students were sexually and physically abused by priests and nuns. [The New York Times]Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• Recipe of the day: If you’re looking for big flavor, a chicken tagine is just what you need.• Being a wedding guest can get pricey. Here’s how to cut costs.• Have a tiny apartment? These are the best cleaning tools for a small space.• In Cambodia, ethnic Vietnamese live in floating villages, above, spread across the Mekong River, a symbol of their perpetually adrift status in Cambodian society.• An ancient guide: In Rome, you can actually map a 2,000-year-old eyewitness account of history onto the modern urban landscape.• In memoriam: Liam O’Flynn, 72, a master Irish piper who “could move your heart” with the most difficult instrument to play in the arsenal of Irish music.• A landmark ruling in Israel allows babies to be conceived from frozen embryos or sperm of people who have died. But is it ethical?On this day in 1961, the 23rd Amendment to the U.S. Constitution was approved by the required three-fourths of the states, giving Washingtonians the right to vote for president and vice president for the first time in more than 160 years.“The United States finally gave its capital the vote today,” The Times noted on its front page, with a hint of impatience.The amendment granted representation to the District of Columbia in the Electoral College, where states are given electors based on population. Although the District’s population (estimated around 700,000 in 2017) is larger than that of some states, it is given no more electors than the least populous state, which is currently Wyoming.At the time, the push to give the vote to the district, with its large African-American population, became caught up in the civil rights movement. The amendment was opposed in the South, where Tennessee was the only state to ratify it.Democrats have since been able to count on the district’s three electoral votes, which have been cast for each of the party’s presidential candidates, starting with Lyndon Johnson in 1964.Although the district’s residents have a say at the White House, they lack a full voice in Congress, where their representative does not have full voting rights.Chris Stanford contributed reporting._____Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.Check out this page to find a Morning Briefing for your region. (In addition to our European edition, we have Australian, Asian and U.S. editions.)Sign up here to receive an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights, and here’s our full range of free newsletters.What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning. • Confident, reasonable — willing to bargain.That’s how North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, came across in his debut as a global statesman — and he did so with a dash of mystery. Here’s how the Chinese and North Korean news media portrayed the meeting with President Xi Jinping.Mr. Kim’s two-day visit — his first trip abroad since taking power — was a reminder of how much he has set the agenda in the North Korean nuclear crisis and, our correspondent writes, what a strong hand he has going into negotiations.President Trump was quick to chime in. He posted on Twitter that Mr. Xi told him that the meeting went “very well” and that Mr. Kim “looks forward to his meeting with me.”_____• Beijing  adjusted the optics in other areas, too.One of China’s biggest financial crimes trials intensified when the founder of Anbang Insurance, Wu Xiaohui, pleaded not guilty to bilking investors out of more than $10 billion. The surprise plea raises the stakes in a prosecution meant to show Beijing’s determination to crack down on a recent borrowing binge.And in the coastal city of Xiamen, the Chinese authorities are trying to keep an underground bishop, Guo Xijin, out of the spotlight Easter weekend. Bishop Guo is at the center of a deal between Beijing and the Vatican — one that requires him to step aside in favor of a Communist Party-approved bishop.Above, Easter Mass at an unofficial church last year in Hebei Province._____• In Melbourne, the committal hearing of Cardinal George Pell is expected to adjourn today. The cardinal, the Catholic Church’s third highest-ranking priest, has been charged with committing “historical sexual offenses.”Courtroom drama on Wednesday: The magistrate asked Cardinal Pell’s lawyer to stop shouting at her, then she denied his request that she recuse herself from the case.Australia’s legal restrictions prevent the details of the Pell case from being made public. Once the hearing is adjourned, the magistrate is expected to announce her decision in mid-April._____• Myanmar has  a new president, but he’ll still be No. 2.U Win Myint, above, is a longtime loyalist to the country’s civilian leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, who is prohibited from serving as president. Mr. Win Myint is expected to do her bidding in the largely ceremonial post.Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi, a Nobel Peace laureate, has been condemned globally for the Myanmar military’s ethnic cleansing of Rohingya Muslims._____• Is your waiter rude, or just French?Few cultural stereotypes are more pervasive than the surly French garçon. That perception was even used as a defense in a recent wrongful termination suit in Canada.A French waiter who was fired for being combative and aggressive said his former bosses were discriminating against his culture and heritage.• Last week, we wrote about income inequality, focusing on how black boys and white boys raised in wealthy U.S. families fare as adults. Here are income mobility charts for Asian-Americans and other groups, and a tool to make your own comparisons.• Facebook will introduce a centralized system for its users to control their privacy and security settings in response to an outcry over the way it has handled personal data.• An advertising group that gave Cambridge Analytica a gold prize for its work for the Trump campaign is now urging marketers to reconsider the ethics of how consumer information is collected. (It has yet to rescind the award.)• Israel’s national airline, El Al, is suing the Israeli government and Air India for discrimination after Air India became the first commercial airline permitted to fly over Saudi Arabia to and from Israel.• U.S. stocks were mixed. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.• Beijing and parts of northern China have been smothered by a sandstorm that pushed the air quality index to hazardous levels. Above, Harbin on Wednesday. [Reuters]• Atlanta’s city government has been brought to its knees since March 22 by a ransomware attack — one of the most sustained and consequential cyberattacks ever mounted against a major U.S. city. [The New York Times]• In Egypt, it’s $3 a vote. With no real challenger in this week’s election, President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi is cajoling, coercing and even paying voters to ensure a credible turnout. [The New York Times]• A children’s book listing Hitler as a “great leader” has been removed from an Indian publisher’s website. [The New York Times]• In Cambodia, Prime Minister Hun Sen boasted that when it comes to negotiating skills, no one “is better than me in the history of world leaders.” (In the same speech, he refused to negotiate with opposition lawmakers.) [The Phnom Penh Post]• Australia’s indigenous languages are all derived from one common tongue, a new study shows. [SBS]Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• Being a wedding guest can get pricey. Here’s how to cut costs.• Have a tiny apartment? These are the best cleaning tools for a small space.• Recipe of the day: If you’re looking for big flavor, a chicken tagine is just what you need.• As the art world’s center of gravity shifts toward Asia, Art Basel Hong Kong is a platform for sales and access to collectors. But for some local galleries, the price to participate is too high. Above, “Black Glass Sun” by Olafur Eliason.• She felt let down by the way some magazines portrayed Asian cuisines — so she started her own. As the publishing industry struggles, a new generation of food magazines is depicting stories that have been overlooked or misrepresented.• And in this week’s Australia Diary, a multicultural group of friends gathered for a Hindu celebration of an important milestone: the first home purchase.On this day in 1961, the 23rd Amendment to the U.S. Constitution was approved by the required three-fourths of the states, giving Washingtonians the right to vote for president and vice president for the first time in more than 160 years.“The United States finally gave its capital the vote today,” The Times noted on its front page, with a hint of impatience.The amendment granted representation to the District of Columbia in the Electoral College, where states are given electors based on population. Although the District’s population (estimated at about 700,000 in 2017) is larger than that of some states, it is given no more electors than the least populous state, which is currently Wyoming.At the time, the push to give the vote to the District, with its large African-American population, became caught up in the civil rights movement. The amendment was opposed in the South, where Tennessee was the only state to ratify it.Democrats have since been able to count on the District’s three electoral votes, which have been cast for each of the party’s presidential candidates, starting with Lyndon Johnson in 1964.Although the District’s residents have a say at the White House, they lack a full voice in Congress, where their representative does not have full voting rights.Chris Stanford contributed reporting._____Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online. Sign up here to get it by email in the Australian, Asian, European or American morning. You can also receive an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights. And our Australia bureau chief offers a weekly letter adding analysis and conversations with readers. Browse our full range of Times newsletters here.What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com.(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning. Following the paper trail of ISIS, railing against Emmanuel Macron and relaxing with monkeys. Here’s the latest:• The ISIS files.On five trips to battle-scarred Iraq, New York Times journalists scoured old Islamic State offices in 11 cities and towns, gathering thousands of documents abandoned by the militants as their “caliphate” crumbled.Following a paper trail that led through booby-trapped streets near the front lines of battle, they found suicide bomber forms, birth certificates, tax records, school books teaching English words like “gun” and “martyr,” and papers from the Ministry of War Spoils. (Here’s a closer look at the documents.)The records reveal how the terrorist group combined brutality and paperwork to wield power over territory that at one point was the size of Britain, with a population estimated at 12 million people.Above, papers littered a room in the bombed-out remnants of the Directorate of Agriculture in Mosul, Iraq, last September._____• Nearly 10 months after the deadly fire in Grenfell Tower, above, in London, many of the survivors left homeless are still living in limbo.While local officials have spent about $280 million on new housing, almost 100 displaced families remain in hotels and other temporary accommodations.The delays are adding to public fury over the disaster, which killed at least 71 people, and traumatized residents have accused the authorities of ignoring their needs._____• Millions of frustrated travelers.A rail strike in France is testing the limits of public anger as union workers face off against President Emmanuel Macron and his efforts to overhaul Europe’s second-largest economy — starting with cuts to their cherished job benefits.But whether French commuters, including those above in Paris on Tuesday, blame the union or Mr. Macron is the big question._____• Last month, we visited a charity food bank in the German city of Essen that had decided to turn away migrants, a move that set off a national debate about refugees and poverty.But now, non-Germans will be welcome once again, after the pantry agreed to give priority to older people and families with young children, regardless of nationality._____• A rapidly escalating trade confrontation.Hours after the White House outlined $50 billion in tariffs on largely high-tech Chinese products, China struck back.Its own proposed tariffs target $50 billion worth of soybeans, above, cars and other American goods. We look at the broad sectors of the U.S. economy under threat.Administration officials say they see no reason to panic — but markets appear unconvinced._____• Anger that YouTube was censoring her videos may have motivated the woman who shot three people on Tuesday at the company’s headquarters in San Bruno, Calif., and then killed herself.Nasim Najafi Aghdam, above, who was in her late 30s and living in California, was a social media star in Iran. Known there as Green Nasim, she posted music parodies and workouts, promoted vegan cooking and opposed animal cruelty. (We gathered some of her clips in this video, which our Tehran bureau chief narrates.)Some of her videos were apparently “demonetized” — deliberately starved of ads — by YouTube, which has been under pressure over offensive content._____• Japan’s famed snow monkeys have long been the picture of hot-springs bliss.Now, they’re also scientific subjects in a study of how stress hormones affect social structure.The long soaks bring their stress levels down. And higher-ranking females spent more time in the pools.(Our video of the basking macaques is seriously fun.)_____• On Spotify’s first day of trading, Sony cashed in, selling 17 percent of its stake in the streaming platform for more than $250 million.• Thousands of Google employees signed a letter protesting the company’s role in a U.S. military program that uses artificial intelligence to interpret videos and could be used in drone strikes.• Facebook said the data of up to 87 million users may have been improperly shared with Cambridge Analytica, the consulting firm connected  to President Trump and the Brexit campaign, far higher than previously cited estimates. (Here’s how we covered the revelations that spurred an uproar on both sides of the Atlantic.)• Name and shame: Britain is hoping to narrow the pay gap by forcing companies to publicly air salary discrepancies between men and women. The government’s role model? Other Western countries, like Germany, Iceland and Australia.• And our Corner Office columnist speaks with Alexis Ohanian, a co-founder of Reddit. (Among the topics: Metallica and his new marriage to Serena Williams.)• U.S. stocks had a rough day, but closed higher. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.• The White House said the U.S. would remain in Syria to continue the fight against the Islamic State, a day after President Trump said he wanted to immediately bring the 2,000 U.S. troops there home. [The New York Times]• The Victoria and Albert Museum in London offered to return to Ethiopia treasures taken by British troops 150 years ago, but only as a loan. [The New York Times]• In The Hague, a jihadist fighter from Mali was brought before the International Criminal Court to face charges of rape, torture and sexual slavery. [The New York Times]• Austria’s new right-wing government has proposed a ban on head scarves in schools for girls under 10 years old. [BBC]• Skripal poisoning: Emboldened by a series of blunders by the British government, Russia will convene a special meeting of the U.N. Security Council in an attempt to undermine allegations that Moscow was behind the nerve agent attack against a former Russian spy. [The Guardian]Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• Do face masks really keep you healthy?• How to respond when a colleague is harassing women.• Recipe of the day: Take a break from the usual stir fry with braised eggplant, pork and mushrooms.• The British comedian and transgender activist Eddie Izzard has acted in Hollywood movies, run 43 marathons in 51 days (for charity) and campaigned against Brexit. Now for his next challenge: He’s joined the governing body of Britain’s Labour Party, just as it’s struggling to tackle an internal crisis over anti-Semitism.• Natural confusion: Global warming is causing spring to arrive early and autumn to come late in many places, and not all plants and animals are adapting at the same rate.• Scottish dinosaurs? Aye, say paleontologists who discovered dozens of giant-size footprints on the Isle of Skye. But don’t get too excited; the prints were left about 170 million years ago.We begin today with a shimmy, or maybe the turkey trot. Perhaps the bunny hug is more your style.Arthur Murray, an immigrant baker’s son who brought ballroom dancing into people’s living rooms, was born this week in 1895. With dance, Mr. Murray’s mission was, he said, to “bring ease for universal heartache, loneliness and desolation.”A tall, gangly kid from the Bronx, Mr. Murray discovered “he had a flair for ballroom dancing” in high school and threw himself into the ballroom dance craze of the early 20th century.He worked in an architecture firm by day and taught lessons by night, eventually turning the lessons into a lucrative mail order magazine business and dance studio franchises around the world.Mr. Murray’s unique method was influenced by his time in design — clearly drawn diagrams of footprints instructed students how and where to move their feet.He also took advantage of regular radio programming and had a weekly variety TV program with “The Arthur Murray Party.” Now, anyone could dance with Mr. Murray, anywhere.For Mr. Murray, who died in 1991, a bad dancer never blames his partner.“To find fault with your partner’s dancing,” Mr. Murray once said, “is the best way of advertising the fact that you are just learning to dance.”Remy Tumin contributed reporting._____Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.Check out this page to find a Morning Briefing for your region. (In addition to our European edition, we have Australian, Asian and U.S. editions.)Sign up here to receive an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights, and here’s our full range of free newsletters.What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning. Russia retaliates, migrants in limbo and celebrating Passover in Spain. Here’s the latest:• Russia hits back.The Kremlin announced that it would expel 150 Western diplomats and close the American Consulate in St. Petersburg, above, as tit-for-tat retaliation continues over a nerve-agent attack on British soil that London and its allies have attributed to Moscow.Britain said it would review the cases of 700 wealthy Russians who were granted visas largely because they could invest millions of dollars. It also signaled an openness to blocking the Russian government from British financial markets.The moves came on a day of good news in the poisoning attack. Yulia Skripal, who was attacked with her father, Sergei Skripal, “is no longer in critical condition.”_____• “Why am I here?” Two years after the E.U. and Turkey struck a deal to halt the flow of asylum seekers, thousands remain stranded on the Greek island of Lesbos.One of our reporters visited a holding camp on the island, above, where she found miserable conditions and growing despair among those unable to move on, yet unwilling to go home.Stuck in limbo, their plight reflects the enduring humanitarian toll of the migration crisis, which is expected to grow again as winter fades._____• Jeremy Corbyn, the British Labour Party’s most left-wing leader in decades, has galvanized supporters eager to get rid of the country’s Conservative government.But a mounting crisis over accusations of anti-Semitism has recharged a bitter argument about his leadership and forced many liberal British Jews to question whether they still have a political home in the party._____• It’s a date.North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, and President Moon Jae-in of South Korea agreed to meet for the first time on April 27.They’ll get together in the truce village of Panmunjom at Peace House, above, meaning that Mr. Kim would become the first leader from the North to set foot in the South since the Korean War.Mr. Kim has signaled that he would meet with President Trump, though no date has been set._____• In Denmark, breaking up is about to get … slower.A push to digitalize official services makes it easy for Danes to view public records and even get divorced online.Maybe too easy, at least in a country with one of Europe’s highest divorce rates.So instead of ending their marriages in a few clicks, couples with children will soon be legally required to wait three months — and get counseling. The change is a rare government acknowledgment that technological innovation can’t solve every societal problem.• The Facebook scandal was a reminder: You’ve entrusted your digital life to a surveillance machine. Can social media be saved? Our columnist offers some solutions.• An astonishing $100 billion: That’s how much Facebook has lost in market capitalization since Feb. 2. The plunge has investors wary of other social media and internet stocks.• Hacked: Data was stolen from 150 million users of the MyFitnessPal nutrition app, according to its owner, Under Armour. The security breach involved user names, email addresses and passwords.• The U.S. plans to invoke an emergency law to limit Chinese investment in sensitive technological sectors, ranging from microchips to 5G wireless.• U.S. stocks were up. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.• Former President Nicolas Sarkozy of France will stand trial on influence-peddling charges, the latest in his series of mounting legal woes. [The New York Times]• Christopher Steele, the author of the notorious Trump dossier, provided a secret report to the F.B.I. asserting that a former Russian minister was murdered in Washington by enforcers hired by an oligarch close to Vladimir Putin. [BuzzFeed]• Robert Mercer, the billionaire Trump donor behind Cambridge Analytica, secretly volunteers as a police officer. But he’s not doing it to protect the public. Rather, the badge lets him carry a concealed gun anywhere in the U.S. [Bloomberg]• In the U.S., the Fox News host Laura Ingraham apologized for taunting a survivor of last month’s school shooting in Parkland, Fla., as at least four companies confirmed they would pull ads from her show. [The New York Times]• Protesters rallied in Ireland and Northern Ireland after two professional rugby players were acquitted of rape. [The Guardian]• Malala Yousafzai, the world’s youngest Nobel laureate, returned to her native Pakistan for the first time since she was gravely wounded there as a child by a Taliban attack in 2012. [The New York Times]Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.•Recipe of the day: End the week with a quick, delicious dinner of pan-roasted salmon with jalapeño.• Use these tips to throw a healthy and relaxed dinner party.• Improve public health through proper sneezing etiquette.• The Jewish holiday of Passover, celebrating liberation and rebirth, begins tonight. In an Opinion piece, a writer traveling through Europe explores the joy and sadness of observing this ancient tradition in Spain, a “land of Jewish ghosts.”• Last week we told you about Ata, a tiny mummy once rumored to be an alien. Now, Chile wants to know how the skeleton was exhumed and smuggled abroad, and researchers have called the medical study unethical.Are you familiar with the term “March Madness”? Americans are awash in it, but for their colleagues abroad, here’s the short form.U.S. college basketball’s signature tournament has reached its peak: The Final Four is on Saturday, setting up the championship game on Monday. Here’s our full coverage.The N.C.A.A. tournament, also known as the Big Dance, is among the most cherished rites of American sports. About 350 colleges and universities field teams in the top division, compared with 65 in football. At the end of the regular season, 68 teams move on to a knockout tournament.The first men’s tournament was held in 1939, and for more than a decade only eight teams were invited. The women’s tourney started in 1982. The moniker “March Madness” became part of pop vernacular in the mid-1980s, stemming from the David-versus-Goliath upsets that always shock players, coaches, fans and bookmakers.The odds of picking a perfect bracket are 1 in 9.2 quintillion. Even so, it’s almost a duty of U.S. citizenship to fill out a tournament bracket. (Last year, ESPN.com reported that some 70 million brackets were filled out and $10.4 billion was wagered.)The men’s Final Four consists of Kansas, Michigan Villanova and Loyola-Chicago, a team that entered as a 300-to-1 underdog and wasn’t supposed to win its first game.In the women’s tournament, Connecticut, Louisville, Mississippi State and Notre Dame are the last teams standing.Matt Futterman contributed reporting._____Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.Check out this page to find a Morning Briefing for your region. (In addition to our European edition, we have Australian, Asian and U.S. editions.)Sign up here to receive an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights, and here’s our full range of free newsletters.What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.SAN FRANCISCO — For months, Facebook’s critics — ranging from Silicon Valley executives to Washington politicians — have been urging the company to do a better job of identifying who is buying political ads and creating pages about hot-button topics on its social media sites.On Friday, just days before its chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, is expected to testify before Congress, Facebook said it had started forcing people who want to buy political or “issue” ads to reveal their identities and verify where they are.Mr. Zuckerberg announced the move in a post on Facebook. He said this verification was meant to prevent foreign interference in elections, like the ads and posts from so-called Russian trolls before and after the 2016 presidential election.Mr. Zuckerberg added that he supported a  Senate bill, the Honest Ads Act, that would bring political advertising on the internet more in line with what is required on broadcast television. One of the sponsors of the bill, which has some bipartisan support but is still in the committee stage, said that statement was a reversal from what Facebook had earlier indicated.In the coming months, Facebook will start verifying the identity and location of people who run pages — which everyone from sports teams and celebrities to partisan groups use to promote information — that have large followings, Mr. Zuckerberg said. The company would not specifically say what would make it ask a page’s creator for an identity, though it said the number of followers would be one factor.Facebook will also soon start clearly labeling political ads and providing more information about them, like who paid for them.Facebook is under increasing pressure to crack down on misinformation before this fall’s hotly contested midterm elections. And scrutiny of social media has become even more intense since the Justice Department charged 13 Russians and three companies in a February indictment that revealed a sophisticated network designed to subvert the 2016 election and to support the Trump campaign.Facebook recently removed 270 accounts associated with Russia’s Internet Research Agency, the “troll factory” that spread misinformation before and after the 2016 election.“These steps by themselves won’t stop all people trying to game the system,” Mr. Zuckerberg said in his post. “But they will make it a lot harder for anyone to do what the Russians did during the 2016 election and use fake accounts and pages to run ads.”The new policy for Facebook and for Instagram, which Facebook owns, covers only a part of what appears on those social media outlets. Most regular pages and accounts will still not require verification.Many of the deliberately misleading or outright false news stories on Facebook are shared among regular users, and they often come from residents of the United States. The company generally doesn’t regulate the content of posts, including their veracity, unless they violate its “community standards,” which prohibit bullying, pornography and threats, among other things.Facebook’s algorithms also tend to magnify the visibility of sensationalist posts because they tend to draw more clicks, reactions and comments.Effective immediately, people who want to run Facebook ads regarding political candidates or issues in the United States need to submit proof of a government-issued identification. They also have to have a mailing address in the United States, though some people think it would be easy for foreign agents to set up one.Facebook will mail a unique code for the advertiser to enter for verification, Andy Stone, a spokesman for Facebook, said. “Advertisers will also have to disclose what candidate, organization or business they represent,” he said in an email.The program will be rolled out to the rest of the world in the coming months, the company said.“We’re committed to getting this done in time for the critical months before the 2018 elections,” Mr. Zuckerberg said in his post.Initially, Mr. Zuckerberg scoffed at the idea that misinformation on Facebook could have played a role in the outcome of the 2016 presidential election. But starting last fall, the company was faced with — and eventually acknowledged — a series of revelations that Russian agents bought ads or spread misinformation on its social media outlets.Facebook said that between 2015 and 2017, 11.4 million Americans saw ads from the Internet Research Agency and more than 126 million users were likely to have seen the unpaid posts from the group’s Facebook pages.Law enforcement officials say Russian agents, looking to stir discord, posed as Americans with Facebook pages that represented a range of political viewpoints, from “Blacktivist” to “Heart of Texas.”The misinformation issue affected many of the company’s more than two billion users around the world. Just a day before Facebook announced its ad changes, civil society groups in Myanmar criticized Mr. Zuckerberg, arguing that he had mischaracterized his company’s effectiveness at detecting and quashing messages encouraging violence in the country.Facebook’s acknowledgment of its problems has accelerated in recent weeks, after revelations that the political consulting firm Cambridge Analytica, which worked with the Trump campaign, had improperly harvested the data of up to 87 million Facebook users.Mr. Zuckerberg is set to testify before the Senate’s Commerce and Judiciary Committees on Tuesday and the House Energy and Commerce Committee on Wednesday.He and Facebook’s chief operating officer, Sheryl Sandberg, have gone on a charm offensive ahead of the hearings. Mr. Zuckerberg spent an hour taking questions from reporters on Wednesday, and Ms. Sandberg has sat for a series of broadcast interviews this week. Both executives signaled that they knew the company had a problem that would not be easily fixed.Mr. Zuckerberg said Facebook would hire more people for the verifications, but did not say how many. Rob Goldman, Facebook’s vice president of advertising, and Alex Himel, its vice president of local business, said in a separate post that the company would also rely on software “to help find advertisers that should have gone through the authorizations process but did not.”They added that Facebook was also hoping its users would report political ads that didn’t have proper disclosures.Facebook will also begin adding “political ad” labels to such posts and will allow users to see who was behind political ads, the basic demographic information about who saw those ads and other ads run by those people, Mr. Goldman and Mr. Himel said. Facebook began testing its verifications over the past several days, “and people will begin seeing the label and additional information in the U.S. later this spring,” they said.Testing of the political ad disclosures has already begun in Canada and will roll out globally this summer, the company said.The policy builds on an announcement in October that Facebook would start verifying advertisers running “election-related” ads. Critics said that would not capture many of the ads run by Russian agents around the 2016 election, which focused on issues rather than specific elections. One Internet Research Agency ad, for example, featured a Confederate flag and said, “The South will rise again!”Facebook’s move on Friday would address those issue ads. Most of the Russian ads focused on “divisive political issues like guns, L.G.B.T. rights, immigration and racial issues,” Senator Mark Warner, Democrat of Virginia, said in a statement.“That’s why today’s announcement by Facebook is so important,” he added.Facebook hadn’t always been on board with such disclosures. In October, Mr. Warner co-sponsored the Honest Ads Act, which would require tech companies to disclose who is behind political ads on their sites. Facebook told congressional aides that it would struggle to comply with the legislation because it often struggled to understand whether an ad was political or commercial, and that the sheer number of Facebook ads also complicated that task.Rachel Cohen, a spokeswoman for Mr. Warner, said on Friday that his office had met with Facebook officials regarding the bill several times and that they hadn’t supported it.Another co-sponsor of the bill, Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota, applauded Facebook on Friday for voluntarily complying with the bill’s proposals, but added in a statement that “a patchwork of voluntary measures from tech companies isn’t going to cut it.”Facebook’s political-ad disclosures would in some ways do more than what is expected of television networks because the company would allow users to see all of the ads run by a group, said Travis Ridout, a Washington State University professor and co-director of the Wesleyan Media Project, which tracks political advertising.Still, Facebook’s verification plans don’t seem foolproof, Mr. Ridout said. “It’s certainly a great step to take and helps to solve the problem of foreign influence,” he said. “But I would not be surprised if people get creative and find ways around those requirements.” Good Monday. Here’s what we’re watching.• Elon Musk finally responded to last week’s bad news about Tesla.• Trump continues to go after Amazon.• China retaliated to President Trump’s steel and aluminum tariffs.• Tech leaders have been keeping mum on Facebook.Get this in your inbox each morning. Sign up here.For months, the stock market rally seemed to have the strength to plow through the obstacles that the Trump administration threw in its way.But now, the S.&P. 500 index is down more than 10 percent from its all-time high.President Donald Trump’s actions seem to be increasingly taking their toll. When the Trump administration first pushed for steel and aluminum tariffs in February, investors weren’t happy, but the market soon rebounded. Now investors seem to be growing more nervous as the United States’ biggest trading partners show signs that they are ready to fight back. China’s retaliatory tariffs, which appear to be more stringent than expected, suggest the country will take a hard stance.Early in his presidency, investors quickly learned to shrug off  Mr. Trump’s criticism of companies. In recent days, though, Mr. Trump has targeted Amazon in tweets, asserting that the company has an unfair advantage. It’s not clear what he could do to hurt Amazon’s business, but the company’s stock has plunged. Amazon’s shares may well bounce back, but the criticism has added to investors’ concerns about the outlook for large technology companies, whose soaring stock prices spearheaded the rally that took to the S.&P. 500 to its all-time high in January.Too much blame can be placed on the White House, however.Before investors began fretting about tech and trade, the underpinnings of the stock market’s ascent were perhaps not as robust as they looked. Wall Street analysts expect earnings for the companies in the S.&P. 500 to increase 25 percent this year, according to data compiled by Standard & Poor’s, an unusually large jump that was reflected in the stock market valuations. Much of that projected earnings increase is coming from tax cuts and some from expectations that companies’ revenue would grow at a nice clip as global growth stayed strong.The tax cuts are certainly going to improve profits. But rising interest rates around the world could weigh somewhat on companies’ revenue growth. And if wages and other costs come in higher than expected — a significant possibility when the economy is suffering a shortage of some workers — profit margins could get squeezed. “I don’t think either of those are in the numbers,” said Jim Paulsen, chief market strategist at the Leuthold Group.— Peter EavisA little humor has not cleared the clouds over Tesla.Shares in the company were once again sliding on Monday after the company’s C.E.O., Elon Musk, joked on April 1 that Tesla had gone bankrupt, an apparent attempt to make light of concerns that the electric car maker is straining under its debt load.Tesla’s stock is now down 35 percent from its high of last year. A major reason for the slide is the company’s struggles to meet production targets for its lower-priced Model 3 car. Delays, of course, raise questions about Tesla’s ability to become an efficient mass producer of autos. The company needs to sell a significantly higher number of cars to generate the cash to finance its business and meet debt payments. Tesla is expected early this week to release its first-quarter production and delivery numbers.Electrek, a publication that covers electric vehicles, reported late Monday morning that Mr. Musk had sent out an email to employees saying that the company was producing more than 2,000 Model 3s a week. Tesla’s stock bounced after the report.Tesla’s technology is also facing intense scrutiny after one of its Model X cars crashed on March 23, killing the driver. Tesla said late Friday that its assisted driving system, called Autopilot, was engaged in the car before its collision with a concrete divider. As our colleague Neal E. Boudette wrote:Tesla’s website says one of Autopilot’s safety features is “Automatic Emergency Braking.” But a Tesla owner’s manual warns riders that this feature “is not designed to avoid a collision.” Wired recently reported that systems like Autopilot are not necessarily designed to detect static obstacles. In the words of one expert:Doubts about the fundamental capabilities of Tesla’s Autopilot could crimp demand for its cars among a customer base that is often seeking the best technology.Questions are also swirling around the timing of Tesla’s announcement about the crash. In its first communication about the accident, the company said:The investigation is not over. Yet Tesla went ahead and provided its update on Friday. The motive for doing so is not clear. The United States National Transportation Safety Board on Sunday said it was “unhappy” that Tesla had released information about the crash.- Peter EavisTech companies are again dragging down stocks on Wall Street.The S.&P. 500 and the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite are off 3.1 percent and 3.5 percent Monday. The continued fall in the share prices of some of the biggest tech companies is weighing heavily on the indexes.Amazon is down 5.4 percent, Netflix is off 5.9 percent, Facebook fell 3 percent, Google-parent Alphabet slipped 3.6 percent and Apple dropped 5.9 percent.After leading the market higher for much of the past two years, tech stocks have hit some turbulence. Since March 16, Facebook, Alphabet, Netflix and Amazon are all down more than 12 percent, while Apple is down 7.3 percent.Over that period the business models of those companies have come under increased scrutiny. News that Cambridge Analytica, a political data firm hired by President Trump’s 2016 election campaign, gained access to private information on more than 50 million Facebook users has weighed not only on the shares of Facebook but on Alphabet as well. Amazon, meanwhile, has come under attack from President Trump.In all, those companies have lost more than $300 billion in market value the past two weeks.President Trump attacked the e-commerce again on Monday morning.Monday’s tweet is the latest over the past five days from Mr. Trump criticizing Amazon. Over that period, Mr. Trump has accused Amazon of not paying enough taxes, of putting thousands of local retailers out of business and of using the United States Postal Service as its “Delivery Boy.”Mr. Trump’s willingness to again single out Amazon and characterize it as a tax cheat and a job killer is a remarkable use of the presidential bully pulpit that could have serious implications for the company even without any formal moves by the federal government.Amazon’s shares are down 4 percent and are off nearly 11 percent since Axios reported on Wednesday about Mr. Trump’s anger toward the company.Context• Amazon has said that the Postal Regulatory Commission, which oversees the service, has consistently found that its contracts with Amazon are profitable.• The internet giant collects sales taxes on its own products in all 45 states that have one, but third-party vendors who sell products on the site often do not collect sales tax, a fact that rivals say is unfair. In addition, some municipalities complain that the company does not collect local taxes.Critic’s cornerDA Davidson analyst Tom Forte wrote in a note via Reuters:Shares of the chip maker are down 9 percent, their steepest decline in more than two years, after Bloomberg reported that Apple is planning to use its own chips in Mac computers beginning as early as 2020.Citing anonymous sources, Bloomberg’s Ian King and Matt Gurman report:Apple provides Intel with about 5 percent of its annual revenue.Kenneth C. Griffin’s Citadel has just hired Phil Villhauer, a former top trader at Steven A. Cohen’s investment firm. Mr. Villhauer will become deputy head of global equities at Citadel, a newly created position. He will officially join the Chicago-based hedge fund in the middle of April and work out of Citadel’s office in New York, a Citadel spokesman confirmed.“We see this as a big hire for us,” said Zia Ahmed, a Citadel spokesman.Mr. Villhauer left Mr. Cohen’s family office, Point72 Asset Management, in October after working for the billionaire investor for roughly 15 years. Mr. Villhauer had started at Mr. Cohen’s former firm, SAC Capital Advisors, and most recently served as head of global trading at Point72.The timing of Mr. Villhauer’s departure came just months before Mr. Cohen was to begin managing money for outside investors.In January, Mr. Cohen reconfigured Point72 as a hedge fund after establishing it as a family office in 2014 to manage $11 billion of his personal wealth. Point72 has said it has raised between $2 billion and $4 billion in outside money.Mr. Villhauer had been with Mr. Cohen through both the good days and bad days. He was there when SAC turned into a powerhouse hedge fund, and he was there when the fund pleaded guilty to insider trading charges in 2013. The guilty plea required the firm to stop managing money for outside investors.When Mr. Villhauer left Point72, Mr. Cohen, in a letter to employees, called the departure a “retirement” and said he was sad to see Mr. Villhauer go.Now Mr. Villhauer will start a new chapter in his career at another well-known hedge fund firm.____________________________As Facebook lurches from crisis to crisis, other tech leaders like Marc Benioff and Tim Cook have criticized the company. But, for the most part, it’s in their culture to stick together,  Nick Wingfield writes.Customers have less trouble speaking out, but those looking to punish major tech companies are finding that but boycotts are easier said than done.At Facebook, the turmoil continued this weekend after a 2016 memo was leaked in which Andrew Bosworth, a vice president, wrote, “Maybe someone dies in a terrorist attack coordinated on our tools. And still we connect people. The ugly truth is that we believe in connecting people so deeply that anything that allows us to connect more people more often is *de factor* good.”Mr. Bosworth and Mark Zuckerberg disavowed the memo, but the fallout has been wide, with employees calling for a hunt to find leakers.Critic’s corner “Mr. Zuckerberg’s comments suggest he still doesn’t get it: What matters is not whether internet companies ‘deserve’ our private information but why we as consumers do not have meaningful ways to protect that data from being siphoned for sale in the first place,” Tom Wheeler, a former F.C.C. chairman, writes in an NYT op-ed.More on data and privacy Hackers have stolen more than five million credit and debit card numbers from Saks and Lord & Taylor, a cybersecurity firm said. Amazon and other companies have filed patents that show how assistants could monitor what people say, information that could then be used for ads and product recommendations. For critics, this highlights the need for regulators to get more involved in data collection. Entrepreneurs, companies and governments are looking into whether  blockchain could be the answer to fears about personal data being shared too liberally.• President Trump accused The Washington Post of operating as a lobbyist for Amazon, escalating his assault on the company. He also accused Amazon of a “Post Office scam,” although Amazon brings in money for the Postal Service. (WaPo)• A global race to automate stores is underway as retailers seek to prevent Amazon from dominating their market. China has been an especially fertile place for these experiments. (NYT)• The tech industry has warmed to the White House. (NYT)• The European Commission is preparing to crack down on social media companies accused of spreading fake news. (FT)• A Russian man accused of hacking three U.S. technology companies in 2012 has been extradited from the Czech Republic. (NYT)• Alibaba is taking full control of the food delivery start-up Ele.me. (Bloomberg)• Dara Khosrowshahi is trying to change Uber’s image, but can he do it without sacrificing elements that made the company successful? (The New Yorker)• 3-D printing technology is moving into the construction business. (WSJ)• Beijing has unveiled a pilot program that would allow Chinese tech giants to see their shares bought and sold at home. (Bloomberg)• Magic Leap is requiring software developers to keep its mysterious augmented reality headsets under tight security. (LAT)The Chinese government said on Monday that it would place tariffs on the imports of 128 American-made products in retaliation for to President Trump’s tariffs on steel and aluminum.Beijing appeared to go a step beyond its initial threat, Chris Buckley reported. On the list is pork, an important moneymaker in many states that voted for President Trump.The Washington flyaround• Mr. Trump tweeted on Sunday that there would be no deal to protects thousands of young immigrants brought to the country as children and threatened to walk away from the North American Free Trade Agreement.• The FirstEnergy bankruptcy could be an important moment for the Trump administration and its commitment to the coal industry. (WSJ)• Ties to the White House have proven to be a wellspring of trouble for the Kushner family. (NYT)• Are undersea cables used to communicate around the world under risk of attack? (AP)• The bankruptcy of Remington, one of the country’s oldest gunmakers, has stalled a ruling in a lawsuit by family members of those killed in the Sandy Hook shooting. (NYT)• Would firing special counsel Robert Mueller lead to impeachment proceedings? (NYT)• John Bolton, the incoming national security adviser, has argued repeatedly that the United States should engage in cyber warfare. (Politico)When the Justice Department allowed Live Nation to merge with Ticketmaster, it tried to assuage concerns that the deal would cripple competitors.But critics have reason to be skeptical. Here’s how Beau Buffier, the chief of the New York Attorney General’s Antitrust Bureau, described Live Nation:The Justice Department is looking into complaints that Live Nation has used its control over concert tours to pressure venues into contracting with Ticketmaster, a possible violation of antitrust law.The inquiries come as the department is reviewing two more mergers, between AT&T and Time Warner, and Disney and Fox.The department’s new antitrust chief has said that the Live Nation deal and several other deals posed problems because they relied too much on the federal government’s ability to police corporate behavior.“Even if we wanted to do that, we often don’t have the skills or the tools to do so effectively,” the antitrust chief, Assistant Attorney General Makan Delrahim, said in a speech.More for your playlistSpotify’s shares begin trading on Tuesday with a valuation that could exceed $20 billion. But the company still hasn’t turned a profit, and its direct listing could spook investors. The streaming service also is looking to take on music labels directly by “building a two-sided marketplace for users and artists.”The deals flyaround• Walmart’s takeover of Humana isn’t guaranteed, but hospitals are already worried that the deal could hit their bottom lines at a difficult time. (WSJ)• Protectionist policies are increasing barriers to deal making. (WSJ)• Looking to merge asset management divisions, UBS is asking for discounts from fund managers. (FT)• The corporate raider Samuel Belzberg has died at 89. (NYT)• Steve Schwarzman has discovered that $25 million doesn’t necessarily buy naming rights for a public high school. (The Philadelphia Inquirer)• The South China Morning Post has long been Hong Kong’s English-language paper of record. Alibaba has made it part of Beijing’s efforts to project soft power abroad. (NYT)• The accrediting council at center of a for-profit college fraud scandal is looking for a comeback. (NYT)• Coffee sellers are trying to fight a California judge’s ruling that would require the beverage to carry cancer warning labels. (NYT)• Bill Gross is struggling to attract investors to Janus Henderson. (FT)• Nike is reviewing its human resources department after employees raised concerns about pay equity and corporate culture. (WSJ)• In a tight labor market, employers are recruiting refugees to fill undesirable jobs. (NYT)• Is the storied guitar maker Gibson headed for a bankruptcy filing? (NYT)• The new chairman of the Motion Picture Association of America is a Hollywood insider and Washington influencer. (NYT)• Companies are loading up on debt in what could be another area of concern for financial markets. (WSJ)• Some arbitrage funds are struggling to benefit from a boom in mergers. (WSJ)• Devet Capital keeps costs low by flying economy and using Airbnb for business travel. (WSJ)Know someone who would enjoy this newsletter? Tell them to sign up here.You can find live updates throughout the day at nytimes.com/dealbook.We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bizday@nytimes.com.Good Thursday. Here’s what we’re watching:• Why Trump might have trouble reining in Amazon.• Public pension fund wants changes to Facebook’s board.• Trump tweets Amazon does not pay enough taxes.• Another FANG stock took a tumble.• The Trump administration wants to further thwart sensitive Chinese investments.The DealBook newsletter is taking a break for Good Friday. We’ll be back with you on Monday. Sign up for it here.Amazon hasn’t responded to President Trump’s latest tweet about the company, and most likely won’t.Mr. Trump’s criticisms, though, are largely mistaken. For a long time, Amazon did not pay state sales tax, but it does so now when it sells its own goods in states that collect it. It is the case, however, that in most states Amazon does not collect sales taxes on goods sold by third parties through its platform. As for the United States Postal Service, Amazon’s business appears to be giving a welcome lift to its package shipping revenue.Still, Amazon cannot quietly hope that such criticism just fades away. Amazon’s rapid growth, immense bargaining power, eye-catching initiatives and estimated 44 percent share of U.S. e-commerce sales make the company vulnerable to accusations that it is too powerful.But if the Trump administration pursues ways to curtail the company, it would meet sizable obstacles.Amazon accounts for only 4 percent of all retail sales in the United States, a recent survey estimated. Its revenue is a third of Walmart’s and, even after its acquisition of Whole Foods, Amazon’s footing in the grocery business is still small.All in all, it would be hard to show that Amazon is pushing prices higher for consumers.Amazon also has a loyal customer base — it has an estimated 90 million Prime members — and the public views it relatively favorably. When the Department of Justice’s antitrust lawyers went after the proposed merger of Time Warner and AT&T, it was not targeting companies that were particularly popular with the public.Still, some Amazon critics see a possible, though small, opening. In theory, an antitrust case could focus on the firms that supply Amazon with goods, according to Christopher L. Sagers, a law professor at Cleveland State University. If a company consistently uses its power to demand a good from suppliers at too low a price, the public could still get hurt. That’s because the supply of the good could decline, its quality degrade, and there may be less innovation in the sector that produces the good, Mr. Sagers said.But anyone bringing that against Amazon would have to explain why Walmart would not be a target, too.— Peter EavisThe investment adviser to New York City’s pension funds is calling for changes to Facebook’s board to address the fallout from Cambridge Analytica’s improper harvesting of information from 50 million users of the social network.New York City’s comptroller, Scott M. Stringer, wrote in a letter addressed to Dr. Susan Desmond-Hellmann, an independent director at Facebook and the chief executive of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation:New York City’s pension funds, which have more than $193 billion in assets under management, own $895 million of Facebook’s shares, according to the letter. Even with the recent tumble in its shares, Facebook is valued at more than $450 billion.In his letter, Mr. Stringer calls on Facebook’s independent directors to take four steps to help restore investor confidence.Here are the proposed changes:1) Add at least three new independent directors to improve the board’s ability to oversee the evolving risks Facebook faces.2) Name an independent director as chairman, allowing Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive and chairman, to focus on running the company.3) Create a committee of independent directors to oversee the company’s data privacy policies and risks.4) Institute a clawback policy so that the board can “recoup executive pay in the event of violations of law, regulation or company policy.”President Trump spoke out against Amazon on Thursday, saying that the online behemoth does not pay enough taxes and uses the United States postal system “as their Delivery Boy.”The president’s commentary, made in a Twitter post, comes amid reports that Mr. Trump has expressed an interest in reining in the e-commerce business.Amazon and the company’s founder, Jeff Bezos, are among Mr. Trump’s regular Twitter targets. In December, Mr. Trump questioned whether the United States Post Office charges Amazon enough for package deliveries. And in August, Mr. Trump said Amazon hurts taxpaying businesses.Amazon, however, does pay taxes — $412 million in 2016, for instance, according to the company’s report to the Securities and Exchange Commission.Axios reported on Wednesday that Mr. Trump has wondered aloud whether Amazon could be vulnerable to antitrust or competition laws.Amazon shares fell more than 7 percent following that Axios article but recovered some of those losses after a White House official told Reuters that the company faced no particular policy changes. But the administration is always looking at its options, the official added. The stock closed down 4.4 percent Wednesday.Shares were down nearly 2 percent in early trading.Should shareholders worry? The GBH Insights analyst Daniel Ives told Bloomberg that this regulatory threat was unlikely to change Amazon’s business model, but it was still “the last thing nervous tech investors wanted to see today.”Retailers, at least, already have some reason to be cheerful.And Amazon has another target market for expansion: housekeeping.Corporate American will start reporting first-quarter results in less than two weeks, and earnings are expected to be big.Analysts estimate that profits at companies in the S.&P. 500 grew 17.3 percent this quarter, according to FactSet. If the forecasts prove accurate that would be highest earnings growth rate since the first quarter of 2011.Perhaps most surprising, is that analysts have grown more optimistic on corporate earnings as the quarter progressed. The earnings forecast for the index rose 5.4 percent from the start of the quarter to the end. Typically, analysts lower their expectations as the quarter progresses. On average, the profit estimates for the index fall 3.7 percent from the start of the quarter to the end.But there are reasons for investors to temper their enthusiasm. Analysts have not been as optimistic about the abilities of companies to increase sales. Revenue is expected to have grown 7.3 percent in the first quarter, up from a 7 percent rate at the start of the quarter.That suggests analysts are not raising estimates because of increased sales. So why are they? Taxes. And the impact tax reform will have on bottom lines should moderate in the coming quarters.That may already be happening. BofA Merrill Lynch’s earnings revision ratio for the S.&P. 500 fell in March for the first time in three months. Of course, the pullback comes after the ratio hits the highest level on record in February, but it does suggest that earnings lift from tax reform has begun to wane.Investors, always willing to believe in technology companies, spent the last three years piling into their shares with abandon. Now the intellectual underpinnings of that rally are being tested.Exhibit A: Facebook, down 20 percent from its recent high.Exhibit B: Nvidia, off 12 percent from its recent high.Exhibit C: Tesla, not a tech stock but in the FANG+ index.Concerns about Tesla’s ability to fund itself can also be seen in the trading of its debt.The WSJ’s Charley Grant explains:Peter Eavis notes that the latest problems for tech giants have raised deeper doubts:Barclays said on Thursday that it agreed to pay $2 billion to settle a lawsuit by United States authorities that accused the British bank of fraudulently misleading the public in the sale of tens of billions of dollars in securities backed by home mortgages.The Justice Department sued the bank in December 2016 after the two sides failed to reach a settlement despite months of talks. The settlement is the latest by a European lender related to residential mortgage-backed securities sold ahead of the financial crisis and follows agreements reached by Credit Suisse and Deutsche Bank in late 2016.“I am pleased that we have been able to reach a fair and proportionate settlement with the Department of Justice,” James E. Staley, the Barclays chief executive, said in a news release. “It has been a priority for this management team from the start to resolve these historic issues in a timely and appropriate manner wherever possible.”Two former Barclays executives who were sued along with the bank also have reached settlements, agreeing to pay a combined $2 million, the Justice Department said in a news release.Their lawyers separately said the government’s claims were baseless and each agreed to settle the case without admitting wrongdoing.- Chad BrayTammy Kiely is leaving Goldman Sachs to join Morgan Stanley as global head of semiconductor and auto technology investment banking, according to an internal memo seen by The New York Times.Ms. Kiely, who will be based in Menlo Park, Calif., joined Goldman in 1999 and had headed its semiconductor investment banking team since 2006, becoming a partner in 2014. Before Goldman, she worked at KPMG as a certified public accountant in its information, communications and entertainment practice.She has a bachelor’s degree in business administration from the California Polytechnic State University and an M.B.A. from the Stanford University Graduate School of Business.Following her arrival, Mark Edelstone will become chairman of global semiconductor investment banking at Morgan Stanley.The move comes amid a wave of dealmaking among chip makers the past few years.- Chad BrayRevolving door• Equifax has a new C.E.O.: the former G.E. executive Mark Begor. (NYT)• Lior Ron, who helped found the self-driving truck company Otto, has left Uber, which acquired it. (NYT)• A.G. Gangadhar has left G.M.’s self-driving car company, Cruise, after six months as chief technology officer. (Recode)The Advertising Research Foundation gave Cambridge Analytica an award last year. Amid the scandal over Facebook data, it’s thinking again.But the group’s executive, Scott McDonald, said that advertisers cared more about whether the data tech companies offered was accurate than whether they should have collected it.Facebook, for its part, promised yesterday to stop advertisers targeting ads using data from third-party brokers, and to put its user privacy settings in one place, rather than about 20. It’s also rethinking privacy safeguards for forthcoming devices, The Information says.Tim Cook of Apple is calling for privacy regulation: “To me, it’s creepy when I look at something and all of a sudden it’s chasing me all across the web.”And our Kevin Roose considers how to save social media: Facebook could become more of a collective enterprise, social networks could become more like email or users could put an expiry date on information.The tech flyaround• Expect more deals from SoftBank’s Vision Fund. It wants to be the biggest shareholder in 100 tech companies, then consolidate them. It’s nearing a deal for a stake in Swiss Re, too.• The German automakers BMW and Daimler have teamed up to fight Silicon Valley. (NYT)• A Google early-stage venture fund is leading a $6 million investment in a company building software to let cars be driven remotely (by humans). (Bloomberg)• Boeing said it had been hit by WannaCry, the malware that struck in 70 countries last year. (NYT)• Apple facies several lawsuits from consumers for slowing older iPhones to extend battery life. (WSJ)• Warner Music bought Sodatone, a start-up that promises to spot hits early using machine learning. (FT)• How 5G will redraw the map of the wireless industry. (WSJ)While finalizing its plans for trade restrictions, the Trump administration is moving ahead with a more targeted strike against Chinese investment in sensitive American technology.But the Treasury Department faces a challenge if, as planned, it uses the 1977 International Emergency Economic Powers Act.“Just defining what percentage of equity would classify a firm as ‘state-owned’ is difficult, as is the definition of which technologies should be off limits,” the WSJ’s Bob Davis writes. “In some cases, U.S. firms could rely on Chinese ones for innovation, especially in manufacturing.”The political flyaround• A lawsuit arguing that President Trump’s continued business interests violate the Constitution has passed its first test. (NYT)• Republicans’ plan for a second tax cut before the midterm elections has yet to attract much financial support from business. (WaPo)• Treasury bonds remain attractive to investors, but Moody’s argues that the U.S. may have less flexibility for future borrowing. (WSJ)• An infrastructure bill passed before the midterms? Trump administration officials are trying to lower expectations. (WSJ)• Mr. Trump declared the Second Amendment would “never be repealed,” in response to a former Supreme Court justice’s NYT Op-Ed. (NYT)Four women sought police protection against Douglas E. Greenberg, one of Morgan Stanley’s top financial advisers.Executives at the bank knew about his behavior, former employees said, but no action was taken until the NYT raised the issue this week.The bank’s wealth-management division accounts for nearly half Morgan Stanley’s revenue and is seen as its prime source of future profits.With an aging and declining population in Japan, companies have to look elsewhere to grow. Takeda Pharmaceuticals’ potential bid for Shire could be one of the largest acquisitions ever of a Western company by a Japanese buyer.Critics’ corner: It’s not really about cost savings, argues Bloomberg Gadfly’s Chris Hughes: “In reality, the attraction is that Shire is cheap and vulnerable — something other bidders will see.” And the FT’s Lex would welcome that: “There are better potential matches.” AT&T-Time Warner trial update: The head of Turner broadcasting said that his company’s channels would not be used as a weapon against rivals if the deal went through. The judge overseeing the case told the parties to speed up their presentation. And if the deal isn’t completed by Apr. 22, it may cost AT&T  up to $1.1 billion in special redemptions.The deals flyaround• Concho Resources will buy RSP Permian for $9.5 billion, creating a shale-oil colossus and adding to the rush to produce more oil. (NYT)• Renault and Nissan are in talks to merge, unnamed sources said. (Bloomberg)• Vivendi and Elliott Management are tussling over Telecom Italia. (FT)• Stella McCartney has agreed to buy Kering out of her fashion brand, regaining full control. (NYT)• CME Group has offered to buy NEX Group, which operates bond-trading platforms, for $5.4 billion. (WSJ)• The defense contractor CACI International has withdraw its bid for CSRA, which offers information technology services to government agencies and now looks likely to be acquired by General Dynamics. (WaPo)• Silver Lake is taking a $500 million stake in the online personal finance company Credit Karma. (WSJ)• The technology company DocuSign, not yet profitable, has filed for an I.P.O. (WSJ)• Anbang, the insurer seized by the Chinese government, is continuing to offer the small-investor products that fueled its growth. (NYT)• The economics of home buying are getting interesting, with higher mortgage rates, tax changes and a supply-demand imbalance. (NYT)• Wells Fargo is taking a measured approach to the gun debate, its chief executive, Tim Sloan, said — but does not believe a bank can be an “arbiter of what an American can buy.” (Charlotte Observer)• Bumble is suing Match Group, which owns Tinder, accusing it of stealing trade secrets and interfering in Bumble’s business. (Recode)• Deutsche Bank is considering more cuts in its investment bank, unnamed sources say, while its chief executive, John Cryan, has insisted that he’s staying. (Bloomberg)• The Wing, a members’ club for women, is being investigated by New York authorities for discrimination. (NYT)• The C.F.T.C. chairman, J. Christopher Giancarlo, has become a Twitter star — complete with a nickname, “Cryptodad” — over his digital currency views. (Bloomberg)• Investors who lost money on the blood-testing firm Theranos may end up fighting the S.E.C. over its assets. (Bloomberg)Know someone who would enjoy this newsletter? Tell them to sign up here.You can find live updates throughout the day at nytimes.com/dealbook.We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bizday@nytimes.com.ABUJA —  Nigeria's former president Goodluck Jonathan was "not aware" of any attempts by political consultancy Cambridge Analytica to interfere in elections in 2007 and 2015, his spokesman said on Thursday.The UK-based political consultancy is facing allegations that it improperly accessed data from social media website Facebook to target voters prior to the U.S. presidential election and Britain's Brexit referendum in 2016.In Nigeria, a government committee is looking into claims that SCL Elections, a Cambridge Analytica affiliate, organized rallies to dissuade opposition supporters from voting against Jonathan's then-ruling People's Democratic Party (PDP) in 2007."Goodluck Jonathan was not aware of such attempts, if there were any," said the ex-leader's spokesman Ikechukwu Eze in a statement."The whistleblower who originated the allegation has been consistent in associating it to an unnamed businessman, who was neither linked to the party nor to the Jonathan campaign," Eze said.The government investigation announced on Monday will also look into whether Cambridge Analytica's work for the election campaigns of the PDP broke Nigerian law "or infringed on the rights of other parties and their candidates".PDP candidate Umaru Yar'Adua won the 2007 presidential ballot. He died in office in 2010 and was succeeded by his deputy, Goodluck Jonathan.Unlike in Europe and the United States, where data-privacy laws provide a level of protection to consumers, many Africans have little or no recourse if a data breach occurs because often legal and regulatory safeguards do not exist.(Reporting by Camillus Eboh; Writing by Paul Carsten; Editing by Andrew Bolton)BOGOTA —  Colombia, which will hold presidential elections in May, on Wednesday blocked access to a cell phone application it said might be connected with Cambridge Analytica, the political consultancy that has been accused of violating Facebook users' privacy to influence elections in Britain and the United States.Lawmakers in the United States and Europe are demanding to know more about Facebook's privacy practices after a whistleblower said Cambridge Analytica improperly accessed data to target U.S. and British voters in close-run elections.Colombia's commerce regulator said in a statement it would block an application called Pig.gi, which gives users free top-ups in exchange for receiving ads and recommending their friends. The app has more than a million downloads in Colombia and Mexico combined, the regulator said.The app, which users download via the Google Play store and sign into using their Facebook account, is administered by Farrow Colombia S.A.S and Farrow Mexico S.A.P.I. de CV, the statement said.Attempts to reach Farrow for comment were unsuccessful. A number listed for Farrow in Colombia belongs to another company. There is no listed number for the Mexico branch of the company."As a preventative measure and taking into account the potential risk of a wrongful and massive illegal use of the personal data of thousands of Colombians collected via the download of the Pig.gi application, the application Pig.gi is temporarily blocked while appropriate investigations are undertaken and definitive decisions adopted," the regulator said.The regulator did not specify what evidence it had of a connection between Cambridge Analytica and Farrow. The application will be blocked on the Google Play app store and on social media, as will websites where it can be downloaded.The regulator added it has requested cooperation and information from its counterparts in the United States, United Kingdom, European Union and Mexico.Facebook announced a series of changes on Wednesday to give users more control over their data, after the scandal wiped more than $100 billion from its stock market value.Cambridge Analytica has said it did not use Facebook data in U.S. President Donald Trump's campaign, and that it had deleted all Facebook data it obtained from a third-party app in 2014 after learning the information did not adhere to data protection rules.Colombia will hold presidential elections on May 27.(Reporting by Julia Symmes Cobb and Nelson Bocanegra; Editing by David Gregorio)BOGOTA —  A cellphone application blocked by the Colombian commerce regulator said on Thursday it has not shared Colombian users' data with Cambridge Analytica, the political consultancy that has been accused of violating Facebook users' privacy to influence elections in Britain and the United States.Colombia, which will hold presidential elections in May, on Wednesday blocked access to the Pig.gi app, which gives users free top-ups in exchange for receiving ads and completing surveys. The app has more than a million downloads in Colombia and Mexico combined.The regulator said the app might be connected to Cambridge Analytica, accused by a whistleblower of improperly accessing data to target U.S. and British voters in recent elections.A representative for the app told Reuters in an email on Thursday that Pig.gi did not have a relationship with the consultancy in the Andean country and that it has not shared any data gained from surveys of Colombian users with Cambridge Analytica.Pig.gi also said it had not yet been informed of the ban by the Colombian regulator."Pig.gi users have the choice to share their opinions consensually in exchange for internet connectivity coins. Their opinions are always anonymized before they are sent in accordance with Colombian and Mexican law," the app said in a statement posted on its Facebook page.The app cut ties with Cambridge Analytica in Mexico after the data scandal broke, saying it had shared results of two election polls of Mexican users with the consultancy and other partners.The commerce regulator said it would comment when its investigation had concluded.Facebook said on Wednesday it would end its partnerships with several large data brokers who help advertisers target people on the social network. The company says the information of about 50 million Facebook users wrongly ended up in the hands of Cambridge Analytica.Cambridge Analytica has denied Facebook data was used to help to build profiles on American voters and build support for Donald Trump in the 2016 U.S. presidential election.(Reporting by Julia Symmes Cobb, editing by G Crosse)BOGOTA —  Colombia, which will hold presidential elections in May, on Wednesday blocked access to a cell phone application it said might be connected with Cambridge Analytica, the political consultancy that has been accused of violating Facebook users' privacy to influence elections in Britain and the United States.Lawmakers in the United States and Europe are demanding to know more about Facebook's privacy practices after a whistleblower said Cambridge Analytica improperly accessed data to target U.S. and British voters in close-run elections.Colombia's commerce regulator said in a statement it would block an application called Pig.gi, which gives users free top-ups in exchange for receiving ads and recommending their friends. The app has more than a million downloads in Colombia and Mexico combined, the regulator said.The app, which users download via the Google Play store and sign into using their Facebook account, is administered by Farrow Colombia S.A.S and Farrow Mexico S.A.P.I. de CV, the statement said.Attempts to reach Farrow for comment were unsuccessful. A number listed for Farrow in Colombia belongs to another company. There is no listed number for the Mexico branch of the company."As a preventative measure and taking into account the potential risk of a wrongful and massive illegal use of the personal data of thousands of Colombians collected via the download of the Pig.gi application, the application Pig.gi is temporarily blocked while appropriate investigations are undertaken and definitive decisions adopted," the regulator said.The regulator did not specify what evidence it had of a connection between Cambridge Analytica and Farrow. The application will be blocked on the Google Play app store and on social media, as will websites where it can be downloaded.The regulator added it has requested cooperation and information from its counterparts in the United States, United Kingdom, European Union and Mexico.Facebook announced a series of changes on Wednesday to give users more control over their data, after the scandal wiped more than $100 billion from its stock market value.Cambridge Analytica has said it did not use Facebook data in U.S. President Donald Trump's campaign, and that it had deleted all Facebook data it obtained from a third-party app in 2014 after learning the information did not adhere to data protection rules.Colombia will hold presidential elections on May 27.(Reporting by Julia Symmes Cobb and Nelson Bocanegra; Editing by David Gregorio) Good Thursday. Here’s what we’re watching:• Jamie Dimon chafes under liquidity rules.• Mark Zuckerberg has disclosed more on how much Facebook user data may have been accessed.• The White House is still talking tough on trade with China.• Blackstone’s infrastructure fund isn’t doing so well.Get this in your inbox each morning. Sign up here.On Wall Street, there’s been a running parlor game about whether Jamie Dimon, JPMorgan Chase’s chief executive, would try to run for president in 2020. His annual letters, filled with commentary on U.S. policy, have only increased the chatter, and this year’s letter, released Thursday, is no different. It touches on everything from trade to immigration. While Mr. Dimon, who once called himself “barely a Democrat,” says he plans to stay at the bank for the next five years, the question among political prognosticators is whether Mr. Dimon’s policy views could ever find a home among voters in this politically polarized environment.Mr. Dimon’s sensible letter was seemingly supportive of some of President Trump’s policies, while taking the opposing side on others. Mr. Dimon particularly applauded the corporate tax cut and deregulation efforts. On China trade, Mr. Dimon writes: “It is not unreasonable for the United States to press ahead for more equivalency,” and that “one of the administration’s best arguments is that negotiation alone has not worked.” However, he said he would like to see more cooperation with U.S. allies on talks with China and added that the U.S. should “revisit the Trans-Pacific Partnership.”On immigration, he called for tougher border control, writing, “American citizens have the right to complain that we have not successfully protected our borders since the last immigration reform in 1986.” He also said, “People immigrating to this country should be taught American history, our language and our principles.” At the same time, he also advocated for “a path to legal status and citizenship” for “Dreamers” and improving “merit-based immigration” programs so that immigrants educated here can stay.Mr. Dimon made a point of saying that part of the problems facing the country is that too many people are talking past each other.“When people argue as if there are binary solutions, the argument is almost always wrong,” he wrote, advocating that people try to look at all sides of a situation. “I tell my liberal friends to read columnists like Arthur Brooks and George Will. And I tell my conservative friends to read writers like Tom Friedman.”If Mr. Dimon were to run, he would likely have to do so as an independent. It is hard to see how liberal Democrats would embrace much of his deregulatory positions. And yet many of his positions – and especially some of his social positions not enunciated in his letter — may not be far right enough to capture the interest of Republicans.Maybe the country needs someone in the middle, but history has not been kind to third-party candidates.— Andrew Ross SorkinJamie Dimon, in his annual letter to JPMorgan Chase’s shareholders, had much to say about political issues like trade and immigration.But he also addressed a policy area much closer to home – bank regulation. Mr. Dimon often has expressed skepticism about aspects of the banking overhaul that took place in the wake of the financial crisis. But his remarks on regulation arguably carry more weight now. Congress is closer to modifying the post-crisis rules than at any point since Dodd-Frank was signed into law in 2010. An important regulatory requirement Mr. Dimon criticized, therefore, might become a focus for those wanting to roll back the rules.Mr. Dimon in this year’s letter zeroed in on regulations that require banks to have a certain amount of liquidity, the financial term for access to cash or low-risk assets that can be easily sold for cash.In 2008, some large financial firms were crippled when customers, depositors and creditors withdrew their money. The Federal Reserve and taxpayers had to step in to support the banks. To help prevent a repeat of this, post-crisis rules require that banks hold a certain amount of liquid assets to cover a theoretical level of outflows. Mr. Dimon is in favor of banks having more liquidity than before the crisis, but in the letter, released Thursday, he wrote:Notably, legislation currently in Congress would tweak liquidity rules. If it passes, bankers may press for more loosening. And, as they have before, bank lobbyists may deploy Mr. Dimon’s main argument here – that regulation can lead to less lending. But there are flaws in this line of attack, especially when it comes to liquidity rules.First, a bank that lacks liquidity is in no position to lend. When a bank’s creditors and customers fear it doesn’t have enough cash in reserve, they will most likely withdraw their money. This not only deprives the bank of the money it needs to lend, it also sharply reduces its chance of survival. Or as Gregg Gelzinis of the left-leaning Center for American Progress puts it, “You won’t be able to take this action if you fail.”Perhaps more importantly, Mr. Dimon leaves out some crucial context. Congress designed the whole post-crisis overhaul to ensure that banks have the funds on hand to lend during a downturn. Dodd-Frank’s architects saw that when banks stop lending, it makes a recession far worse. And that is one reason why banks now have much higher levels of capital. Regulators expect that they will use up some of that capital to keep lending through the economic tumult. This is why the Federal Reserve said after its last bank stress tests:Andrew Gray, a JPMorgan spokesman, followed up with more material on Mr. Dimon’s thinking on liquidity.He re-emphasized Mr. Dimon’s point about having to tie up funds that could be used to make loans. Mr. Gray noted that a bank facing outflows would be expected to keep refilling its pool of liquid assets to be in compliance with a liquidity regulation. This would leave fewer funds for lending and making markets, Mr. Gray asserted.He also addressed the argument that higher capital levels, not liquidity, will largely determine the extent to which banks will lend through a downturn. Mr. Gray asserted that liquidity rules play an important role in ensuring banks have the resources to participate in wider financial markets. Rules forcing the hoarding of liquidity may, thus, crimp that activity.— Peter EavisMick Mulvaney, the acting director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, has complained that the regulator engages in “wasteful spending.” He even submitted a quarterly budget request recently of $0.That attitude apparently didn’t apply to two of his recent hires.Mr. Mulvaney appointed two senior staff members who are paid salaries far above what they had been earning in their previous government jobs in Washington, according to agency documents obtained by The New York Times through a public records request.• Kirsten Sutton was hired in January to be the agency’s chief of staff. Mr. Mulvaney agreed to pay her $259,500 a year. Her salary is the highest allowed under the consumer bureau’s pay scale and represents a raise of more than 50 percent working for one of the C.F.P.B.’s fiercest critics, Representative Jeb Hensarling of Texas, the Republican chairman of the House Financial Services Committee. It is also 22 percent more than her predecessor.• Brian Johnson is another new deputy. In late December, Mr. Mulvaney signed paperwork that awarded Mr. Johnson a salary of $239,595. Mr. Johnson previously worked on the House Financial Services Committee. In his most recent job there, as policy director, he earned about $170,000 a year, according to LegiStorm. Of the 20 people at the bureau with the title of senior adviser, Mr. Johnson is the second-highest paid. (Another adviser, whose name wasn’t disclosed in the public records reviewed by The Times, is paid $240,000.)ContextThe consumer bureau, as well as fellow financial regulators like the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, is allowed under federal law to pay employees significantly more than other government agencies can pay. The rationale is that the higher salaries are necessary to recruit skilled employees who otherwise might land jobs on Wall Street.As a result, the C.F.P.B. is stocked with employees who earn more than the average Washington bureaucrat. Of the agency’s 1,600 employees, 219 make more than $200,000, according to the records reviewed by The Times.— Stacy CowleyBlackRock, the world’s largest money manager, plans to offer a series of new products allowing individuals and institutions to invest in market indexes without putting money into manufacturers and retailers of firearms.They include:• a new exchange-traded fund that will track the performance of the MSCI USA Small Cap Extended ESG Focus Index, composed of small stocks with favorable environmental, social and governance standards, while specifically excluding producers and large retailers of civilian firearms.• a similar credit-focused ETF that eschews the debt of gunmakers and distributors.• an option to take the guns out of institutional strategies tracking major market indexes, including the S&P 500, the Russell 2000 and three others.Critic’s cornerRob Cox of Breakigviews writes:What emerged from Facebook yesterday — in Mark Zuckerberg’s conference call with reporters and in a company blog post — were revelations that users’ public data was more compromised than previously thought.• Facebook said Cambridge Analytica harvested the data of 87 million users, not 50 million.• A vulnerability in search and account recovery functions may have exposed “most” of Facebook’s 2 billion users to unauthorized harvesting of their public profile information.Mr. Zuckerberg, ahead of his testimony to Congress, struck a conciliatory tone. But regulators in Australia, the U.S. and elsewhere are investigating whether the company broke privacy rules.Facebook also outlined steps to prevent misuse of its platform. Among the most significant: restriction of access to so-called A.P.I.s that let developers plug into its network. The Verge’s take: “Effectively, Facebook has put a nail in the coffin of its app platform.”The most immediate effect: Tinder users couldn’t log in.A brighter note for Facebook: Its shares are up in premarket trading today, after Mr. Zuckerberg said that #DeleteFacebook didn’t appear to be having much effect.The Facebook calendar• April 9: Alerts should start popping up for users whose information may have been shared with Cambridge Analytica.• April 10: Mr. Zuckerberg is scheduled to testify before the Senate’s Commerce and Judiciary committees.• April 11: He will testify before the House Energy and Commerce Committee.Elsewhere in tech and regulation: A closer look at Margrethe Vestager, the public face of Europe’s tech clampdown. And the privacy advocate Max Schrems says the fight over user data has just begun.President Trump and the White House insist that the U.S. isn’t in a trade war with China. But it hasn’t backed off from its tariff threats, and the White House press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, said the U.S. may feel “a little bit of short-term pain.”More from behind the scenes, by Ana Swanson and Keith Bradsher of the NYT:Calming the markets has mostly fallen to Larry Kudlow, the White House’s national economic adviser of less than a week.Peter Eavis’s take: We can take lessons on the U.S.-China trade skirmish from Brexit. Looking back, the panicky early reaction to that seems to have sprung more from a fear of the unknown than any big threats to the global trading system.And Greg Ip of the WSJ, who says China started the trade fight, had an informative tweetstorm about each side’s vulnerabilities:But Neil Irwin of the Upshot warns that China has other ways of retaliating.The United States trade deficit rose 1.6 percent to $57.6 billion, its highest level since October 2008. The deficit has now risen for six straight months, the longest such streak since 2000.The merchandise-trade gap with China narrowed to $34.7 billion in February from $35.5 billion. The Trump administration wants to cut $100 billion, or about 25 percent, from the annual deficit with China, Bloomberg points out. During President Trump’s first year in office, the United States’ trade deficit with China rose to $375.2 billion in 2017, a record high.Last May, Blackstone announced with great fanfare that it planned a $40 billion fund with Saudi Arabia to invest in U.S. infrastructure: up to $20 billion from the Saudis, who would match commitments by other outside partners. But as of now, Blackstone has secured just $575 million in such commitments — and missed two fund-raising deadlines.What’s happened, per Kate Kelly and Andrew:• The Saudis wanted the fund overseen by an investment committee, with a seat for them. Blackstone refused.• Many potential investors balked at committing money until an investment team was in place, a process that took some time.In other infrastructure news: D.J. Gribbin, the Trump administration’s infrastructure point person, is leaving the White House, which looks to have delayed its investment plan until after the midterms.• The E.P.A. chief Scott Pruitt, the subject of some unhappy rumblings from the White House, has begun a media pushback against claims about his spending. (Politico)• George Nader, the U.A.E.-connected businessman cooperating with Robert Mueller’s investigation, has links to Russia, too. (NYT)• President Trump plans to deploy National Guard troops to help guard the U.S.’s southwestern border. He’d previously said it would be “our military.” (NYT)• John Kasich is eating at diners in New Hampshire, for some reason. (NYT)• Amalgamated Bank became the latest restrict gun sales by its business customers, following guidelines published by the Mike Bloomberg-backed Everytown for Gun Safety. (Amalgamated)More than 3,100 Googlers have signed a petition protesting the tech colossus’s A.I. work with the Defense Department.More from Scott Shane and Dai Wakabayashi of the NYT:The company line: “We’re actively engaged across the company in a comprehensive discussion of this important topic.”In other defense tech news: Oracle’s Safra Catz reportedly argued to Mr. Trump over dinner Tuesday night that the Pentagon’s process for choosing a cloud services contractor was tilted toward Amazon. (Oracle is also bidding.)The tech flyaround• On balance, the U.S. Postal Service probably does pretty well out of Amazon. Its real problem, Barry Ritholtz argues, is Congress.• Spotify shares ended down yesterday at $144.22, but still up on private stock trades earlier this year. One big winner was Sony, which sold 17.2 percent of its stake.• Meet Fin7 (or Carbanak or Cobalt Spider), the criminal group suspected of many prominent data thefts. And a cyberattack on a natural gas pipeline servicer raised questions about the U.S.’s energy system.• Apple is reportedly working on touchless gestures and a curved screen for iPhones. (Bloomberg)The woman suspected of shooting three people at YouTube headquarters before killing herself had become angry with the company’s policies. Police did not say which ones, but she had posted about YouTube pulling ads from videos that it said did not meet its standards.The woman, Nasim Najafi Aghdam, was a social media video star in Iran and had called YouTube a dictatorship because she was making less money from her posts.Also of note: The attack highlighted the tension between Silicon Valley giants’ love of big, open campuses and their security needs.As the two corporate siblings jostle over a potential union — Viacom has reportedly rejected CBS's offer and is preparing a counter bid — who would run the combined company remains a sticking point. Rich Greenfield of BTIG offered a contrarian case against it being Mr. Moonves of CBS, one of the best-regarded media executives around.“The future of a combined Viacom and CBS is going to be driven by an increasing focus on international and scaling up,” he wrote — an agenda better suited to Viacom’s C.E.O., Bob Bakish.• Investor withdrawals at Bill Ackman’s Pershing Square Capital Management are huge. (WSJ)• Starboard Value plans to continue pressing its proxy fight at Newell Brands. Carl Icahn, who has settled on that one, is off trying to replace the board at SandRidge Energy.• The judge overseeing the Justice Department’s lawsuit to block AT&T’s takeover of Time Warner asked about settling it through arbitration. (WSJ)• Broadcom is officially a U.S. company now. It still can’t go after Qualcomm. (Broadcom)• Some big drug makers are regretting their deals of 2015 and 2016. (FT)• J.M. Smucker will pay $1.9 billion for Ainsworth Pet Nutrition, which makes Rachael Ray’s dog food brand, and will consider selling its U.S. baking brands like Pillsbury. (Reuters)• SS&C of the U.S. is reportedly trying to top Temenos’s £1.4 billion bid for the British trading software maker Fidessa. (FT)— Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan, in his firm’s latest annual letter, where he also talks taxes, deficits and public policy.• Michael Doppelt has rejoined Irving Place Capital as the investment firm’s head of fund-raising and limited partner relations. (Reuters)• Britain’s requirement that companies with at least 250 staff disclose measures of gender pay gaps is forcing a reckoning at many companies. (NYT)• David Smith, chairman of Sinclair Broadcast Group, says the media is getting his company all wrong. (NYT)• Settlement agreements between Bill O’Reilly and two of his accusers were made public for the first time, offering details about his tactics against sexual harassment allegations. (NYT)• Nike’s top human resources executive told employees the company had “failed to gain traction” in hiring and promoting women and minorities. (WSJ)• Why bond kings love Southern California. (Bloomberg)• A guide to the long war between Bumble and Tinder. (NYT)We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bizday@nytimes.com.“One of our biggest responsibilities is to protect data.”That’s what Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive and co-founder, said just over a week ago after revelations that the data research firm Cambridge Analytica had gained access to the profiles of 50 million Facebook users.Over the past year, the downside of social media companies — Facebook foremost among them — has become glaringly apparent. They have been platforms for information campaigns that influenced elections and endangered lives. They have failed to keep users’ personal information private. And the carefully targeted ads that appear on them can be, well, creepy.Now the drumbeat for regulation of social media on both sides of the aisle — and from many in Silicon Valley — is getting louder by the day. “I think that this certain situation is so dire and has become so large that probably some well-crafted regulation is necessary,” Tim Cook, Apple’s chief executive, said recently.Mr. Zuckerberg may be getting tired of other executives sniping at his company, but he needs to come up with a solution — fast. For several weeks, I’ve been canvassing various technology executives, privacy advocates, academics and others to come up with some ideas about exactly what Facebook could do to fix itself.It is not clear that Facebook will be able to stave off regulators, but Mr. Zuckerberg and his colleagues might want to consider this: a “Why Me?” button. (Google, Amazon and others might want to take note, too.)Facebook suffers from a lack of trust because of the asymmetrical nature of the relationship users have with it. We provide it all sorts of information. But we have no idea how the information is being used, how our data is being harvested, how that data is being commingled and cross-referenced with other data sets and ultimately sold to advertisers. (Facebook already has a button, relatively buried in a list of other items, that it calls “Why Am I Seeing This Ad?” It is, to some degree, a crippled version of what I’m suggesting should be introduced on all of Facebook’s properties.)To his credit, Mr. Zuckerberg does appear to recognize the problem that his company faces over privacy concerns. After acknowledging that protecting users’ data is one of the company’s biggest responsibilities, he went on to say, “If you think about what our services are, at their most basic level, you put some content into a service, whether it’s a photo or a video or a text message — whether it’s Facebook or WhatsApp or Instagram — and you’re trusting that that content is going to be shared with the people you want to share it with.”But the solution Facebook offered last week — putting all of your privacy settings on one screen and blocking some third parties from access to data — is just a Band-Aid. It’s a start, but it doesn’t provide a road map for how your information is being used.That’s where the “Why Me?” button could help. This button would sit next to every advertisement and piece of content that appears before you on all of Facebook’s properties, including Instagram and WhatsApp.If you saw an ad or an article pop up on your screen, you could click the “Why Me?” button. Then you would see a full explanation of why that item was pushed to you.The “Why Me?” explanation would not just include the name of the advertiser, but what keywords, demographics or other information the advertiser specifically targeted. It would also offer a full rundown of how your information fit into the parameters of the advertiser’s request and where that information came from.Maybe Facebook saw that you had clicked on a pair of sneakers on a different service that shares information with Facebook. The “Why Me?” section would show you when and where that information was collected. Did Facebook notice you searched for a new cellphone plan? Facebook would tell how it knew that, too.Did Facebook use artificial intelligence to find your face in an image without you or anyone else labeling it? The “Why Me?” section would show you the images that the artificial intelligence system cross-referenced to identify you. Did Facebook scrape another site or buy information about you that it commingled with the data that you had provided? It would tell you that, too.Most important, at every point in the “explanation tree,” the user would have the option to turn off or disable that specific piece of data. Facebook, of course, could — and probably should — explain the trade-offs of such decisions.The “Why Me?” button could also be extended to content. When a friend or company shares a post, Facebook doesn’t just display it to everyone listed as the poster’s friend or follower. Facebook’s algorithms choose which friends and followers see it based on all sorts of parameters, usually related to the kind of content or how you’ve interacted with the friend in the past.The “Why Me?” button should explain all the data points that are used in the calculation and how they are weighted.The current “Why Am I Seeing This Ad?” often says something like: “Company A wants to reach people ages 18 and older who live or were recently in the United States. This is information based on your Facebook profile and where you’ve connected to the internet.”But it hardly tells you the whole story. Facebook doesn’t say so explicitly, but it allows companies to upload their own databases, cross-reference them with Facebook’s data and use that information to serve ads to users. It also doesn’t say how that other site originally got that information about who you are.In fairness, the “Why Me?” button might create all sorts of problems for Facebook, and its advertisers, too. It would allow users — and rivals — to reverse engineer much of the way the system works. And advertisers would probably object to the idea of making their targeting plans public. But that would be the cost of using such large public platforms with such exact targeting.It has become something of a cliché, but in 1913, before he became a Supreme Court justice, Louis D. Brandeis said, “Sunlight is said to be the best of disinfectants.”It could well be applied today at Facebook — and its peer companies — if it wants to avoid a governmental crackdown.If there was one broad takeaway from the data leak involving Cambridge Analytica, the voter profiling firm that obtained private information from up to 87 million Facebook accounts, it’s that you should hesitate before sharing your data with an unknown brand.This lesson applies to just about everything that touches your personal technology, including the apps that you download to your phone or computer and the free online services that you use. And, yes, it also includes those seemingly harmless personality tests run by some unfamiliar organization on Facebook — the kind that helped Cambridge Analytica get the data on users.To make matters worse, the information that can be stolen from you is becoming increasingly personal. Smartphones, for one, are embedded with microphones, motion sensors and cameras that can spy on your every move if corrupted by a bad actor. Home gadgets like internet-connected thermostats, power outlets and audio speakers are capable of collecting information about what you are doing at home, including listening to your conversations, and knowing when you are away from home.It’s time to stop using technology and the internet as though you were shopping at a supermarket. In a grocery store, you can reasonably assume that the food labels are accurate and the products safe to eat, because the food industry is heavily regulated. The handling of personal digital information, in contrast, is  loosely regulated. There have been scores of obscure companies baiting you with products that purport to improve your life — but actually capitalize on your data.“We don’t really know why we’re trusting that a particular company with access to our data won’t do something like sell it or rent it or share it without our consent,” said Lee Tien, a lawyer for the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a nonprofit that focuses on digital rights.That’s not to say the tech behemoths are innocent. The data leak to Cambridge Analytica was ultimately Facebook’s fault because its app platform allowed data to be harvested from people’s friends lists in the first place. About five years ago, Google had to pay a $7 million fine after acknowledging that it had scooped up passwords, email and other personal data with its Street View mapping project.Yet I am recommending taking extra caution with obscure tech brands because it is something under your control. You can take a pause. Don’t immediately download every app you see in an app store or on the web just because it looks fun. Don’t take every quiz you see on Facebook (even if you are dying to know which “Game of Thrones” character identifies with you). Don’t impulse buy internet-connected devices from unfamiliar brands. Don’t do any of this without first doing some research on the reputations of these vendors and their business models.Here are some examples of when unknown brands did us wrong — and the lessons we can learn.Last year, The New York Times revealed that Uber bought information about Lyft, its main ride-hailing competitor in the United States, from Unroll.me, a free email service that offered to unsubscribe people from marketing emails.How did Unroll.me get data about Lyft? Unroll.me scanned users’ inboxes for information and sold it to other businesses, and Uber paid it for data it found about Lyft receipts. Many consumers found it misleading that a company that promised to rid you of spam from marketers made money by selling your information to marketers and other companies.Here’s the kicker: The truth was always laid out in the privacy policy, which said that “we may collect, use, transfer, sell and disclose nonpersonal information for any purpose” and that data could be used “to build anonymous market research products and services.”In response to the backlash, Unroll.me said it was “heartbreaking” to see that people were upset and pledged to be more transparent about its use of data. The app continues to operate.The lessons. Whenever you have the time, read privacy policies before opting to share your data with a brand. This is a daunting task but a healthy exercise, especially when you are unfamiliar and feeling distrustful toward an obscure company. And do the best you can to research a company’s business model. When a service or product is free, assume that your personal information is being monetized.“We all need to know that whenever you’re not paying for the thing, then you’re paying for the thing in a nonmonetary way,” Mr. Tien said.Last year, an app called Soniac was available for Android phones on the Google Play app store. Soniac marketed itself as a messaging app — and indeed, it included features for sending text messages. The less obvious features: The app was also capable of silently recording audio, taking photos with the camera, placing phone calls and downloading call logs among other features.Lookout, a security firm that follows malicious software for Android devices, alerted Google about Soniac’s hidden abilities last year, and the app was quickly removed from the Play app store.Yet Lookout said its researchers had identified over 1,000 spyware apps with many of the same characteristics that Soniac had. Many of those spyware apps were served in third-party app stores that are not authorized by Google.The company that offered Soniac, Iraqwebservice, had published other spyware apps on the Play store. All of its apps have been removed from Play, but Lookout warned that the spyware would probably resurface in the future.The lessons. For one, before you install an app from a company you’ve never heard of, look at its user reviews and do a web search on the company to see if its services are legitimate. You can also check reputable web publications that review apps, like TouchArcade, CNET and Tom’s Guide.For another, when installing an app, take a close look at what data it is accessing. Smartphone apps will ask for permission for access to certain data and sensors. If an app is asking for data that is unrelated to the product, don’t install it. For example, you can reasonably expect a mapping app to ask for your location data, but it shouldn’t need access to your camera.“If something seems outside of the scope, like if a calculator app tells you it needs to use your webcam, say, ‘What, why?’” said Adam Kujawa, the head of malware intelligence at Malwarebytes, a security firm.Third, avoid downloading apps from unofficial app stores and sites that are not affiliated with large brands. And keep in mind that alternative app stores are particularly ripe for malware, because just about anything can be distributed there, similar to a flea market.Parents, beware: A number of internet products have specifically collected data about children. EchoMetrix is a notorious example. In 2009, the company issued a news release bragging that it had predicted the winner of that year’s “American Idol” singing competition.How did it do that? By looking at children’s private information. The company started in 2004 with the name SearchHelp, offering a parental control app called FamilySafe for parents to monitor their children’s online activities. Five years later, it rebranded itself as EchoMetrix and released Pulse, a tool for providing insight to third-party marketers on youths, by aggregating data from millions of teenagers’ chat transcripts and blog posts, among other sources.EchoMetrix’s practices attracted the attention of the Electronic Privacy Information Center, a privacy rights group, which filed a complaint about the company to the Federal Trade Commission. The group accused EchoMetrix of violating the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act by collecting information on minors without parental consent. In 2010, EchoMetrix reached settlements with the commission and the New York attorney general’s office in which it agreed not to analyze or share information about children’s private communications or online activities. EchoMetrix has since rebranded itself as Protext Mobility, a biotech company.The lessons. Be judicious when choosing tech products for your children. Increasingly, toys are beginning to include internet connections — before buying a “smart” toy, do your homework on what the companies are doing with the data. Common Sense Media, a nonprofit that evaluates content and products for families, is a good place to start your research.Perhaps the most important lesson is to acknowledge that you don’t know anything about the vast majority of brands you engage with on the internet. So tread carefully.“These threats aren’t going away,” Mr. Tien said. “With the expansion of data collection and the expansion of what’s possible to collect, it’s just going to continue to proliferate.”Over the last half decade, few stocks have been more beloved by investors and Wall Street analysts than Facebook. No wonder: After a rocky initial public offering in 2012, it has rolled over one obstacle after another, including the shift to mobile computing and the rise of photo sharing. It delivered revenue and user growth that surpassed even the most optimistic projections.By the end of last year, Facebook had 2.2 billion active users. Its stock rose 53 percent last year, single-handedly accounting for 3.7 percent of the 21.8 percent gain in the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index, according to S.&P. Dow Jones Indices. By early February, its market capitalization had surpassed $560 billion, making it the fifth most valuable company in the index.By then Facebook alone accounted for nearly 2 percent of the S.&P. 500 index, which means that anyone who owns a broad-based stock mutual fund or index fund probably owns Facebook shares. Sophisticated investors and institutions, too, have considerable exposure: Goldman Sachs analysts reported last month that Facebook was the second most widely held stock (after Amazon) by hedge funds.Over 90 percent of Wall Street analysts covering the company deemed Facebook a “buy” in early February, even though, at $195 a share, its price-to-earnings ratio, a common valuation measure, was a lofty 35. (The average ratio now is about 24; historically, it has been about 15.)It was, as Wall Street pundits like to say, “priced for perfection.”Whatever else can be said about Facebook’s recent tribulations, this much is certain: Its situation is far from perfection.After revelations that data harvested from Facebook may have been used to try to influence Britain’s vote to leave the European Union and the United States presidential election, the social network giant faces multiple investigations in both Europe and the United States, along with potentially profit-crimping regulations and limits to its use of data. And investor retribution has been swift.Since hitting its peak on Feb. 2, Facebook has lost an astonishing $100 billion in market capitalization. Its stock was trading midweek at close to $153 a share, a decline of nearly 22 percent. (It rebounded by about 4.5 percent Thursday and closed at $159.79.)With Facebook’s plunge, investor concerns have spread to other social media and internet stocks with lofty multiples, like the so-called FANG stocks — Facebook, Apple and Amazon, Netflix and Google — and Twitter. They accounted for more than 10 percent of the S.&P. 500 at their peak.“People who own an index fund need to realize how important Facebook is, and how big a role it and the FANG stocks played in the market’s rise,” said Howard Silverblatt, senior industry analyst for the S.&P. Dow Jones Indices, who oversees statistical analysis for the S.&P. 500. “The FANG leadership is faltering. Social media hasn’t faced much regulation, and now there’s a cloud hanging over those companies.”In the midst of past Facebook euphoria, few saw this coming. One that did was Aiera, a robot that uses artificial intelligence to make stock recommendations. Aiera, an acronym for artificially intelligent equity research analyst, put out a “sell” recommendation for Facebook last fall.So did Brian Wieser, a senior analyst at Pivotal Research Group  who covers media and internet companies. Although he was positive about the stock for most of its long climb, he downgraded Facebook to “sell” last summer based on regulatory and advertiser concerns and what he now considers “systemic management issues.”Not only was it a lonely position, but “the stock went up and up,” Mr. Wieser told me this week. “But I thought the market was wrong, full stop.”“I didn’t know what the catalyst would be, but at some point revenue growth had to slow and the margins go down,” he said. “There are practical limits. And I felt investors were looking at Facebook in much too positive a light. They just ignored all the bad things, and there were a lot of them.”Then, when the news broke this month that a British firm, Cambridge Analytica, had used Facebook data for voter profiling, Mr. Wieser said, he thought it was “the most significant thing that had happened to Facebook since it became a public company.”“Most people hadn’t given much thought to how their data is used,” he added. “But this really exposed the potential abuse. This is digital advertising’s original sin, and there’s going to be a reckoning that even now I don’t think most investors fully appreciate.”The other Facebook skeptic, Aiera, can talk, but Wells Fargo — whose global internet analyst, Ken Sena, developed the robot along with Bryan Healey — wasn’t making its wunderkind available for interviews. But based on Aiera’s published comments, it issued its sell recommendation after analyzing the frequency of negative mentions in the media of Russia’s use of Facebook to influence the presidential election, as well as fundamental valuation and technical factors. (Aiera uses artificial intelligence to read and analyze a half-million pieces of data per day gleaned from the internet. It currently analyzes more than 1,600 stocks.)Wells Fargo has stressed that Aiera remains in experimental mode, but one potential advantage is that it removes all human emotion from its analysis. Thus, Aiera was indifferent to the fact that nearly every other analyst had a buy recommendation on Facebook.That included her putative master, Mr. Sena, who was thrust into the somewhat awkward position of explaining his own buy recommendation even as Aiera said sell.When I spoke to him this week, Mr. Sena stressed that Aiera was a tool that could detect patterns and eliminate bias. “Aiera said election interference was a big deal, and it turned out it was a big deal,” Mr. Sena said. “But it’s not meant to supplant human judgments.”He hasn’t changed his buy recommendation even though he agrees with Mr. Wieser that investors need to take threats of regulation seriously. “The conventional wisdom was that people don’t care that much about how their data is used,” Mr. Sena said. “They like the convenience of targeted advertising. But the level of public outcry over this is new.’’“Facebook is going to have to do a lot of explaining,’’ he added. “I believe they have the capability and the technology to make the platform secure. But it’s going to distract from other initiatives investors are counting on for growth, like virtual reality and video content.”Even so, Facebook’s decline has been so steep that even Mr. Wieser and Aiera may reassess their recommendations if they calculate that the stock has bottomed out.When he last reiterated his sell recommendation, Mr. Wieser’s price target was $152. “I don’t want to be trigger happy on this,” he said. “It’s not clear yet what happens next. I want to fine-tune my thoughts before I revisit this.”Aiera canceled her sell recommendation after the stock plunged. She hasn’t yet made a new recommendation. Of 45 analysts who cover Facebook, 41 currently have a “buy” or “overweight” recommendation, up from 39 a month ago.Mr. Sena is even more bullish on Facebook than he was before, and hasn’t changed his price target of $230. “People are still glued to Facebook and Instagram,” he said.Its price-to-earnings ratio is now just 28, barely above the market average, which makes it “the cheapest stock in our coverage area, and it has some of the best growth prospects,” he said. “There’s no way mathematically to justify a loss of more than $70 billion in market cap.”Christopher Wylie, the Cambridge Analytica whistle-blower, brought Canada into a story that’s drawn intense scrutiny to Facebook this week. And it’s not just because he’s from Victoria, British Columbia.After focusing close attention on the social network with the disclosure that Cambridge used personal data from millions of the social media site’s users without permission to help Donald J. Trump’s election campaign, Mr. Wylie brought a company from his hometown, Aggregate IQ, into the fray this week during testimony before Britain’s Parliament.In his testimony, Mr. Wylie said that Aggregrate, a subsidiary of Cambridge Analytica’s parent, drew on Cambridge’s Facebook data to sway social media opinion in favor of the Leave side in the 2016 British referendum on the European Union vote, and he repeated claims that the Canadian company was used to avoid British campaign spending limits. (The company has denied the claims.)Attention inevitably turned to Mr. Wylie’s activities in Canada. When he was 19, Mr. Wylie worked briefly in the office of Michael Ignatieff, then the Liberal leader. Then early in 2016, when Mr. Trump’s victory was not being widely predicted, Mr. Wylie, through a company called Eunoia Technologies, was given a 100,000 Canadian dollar contract by the Liberal Caucus Research Bureau. Like all of the political parties’ research shops, the bureau is separate from the party’s other operations and is funded by Parliament.Melissa Cotton, the bureau’s managing director, said in a statement that Mr. Wylie did not have access to the party’s data and that he worked on projects that appeared to have involved monitoring social media, identifying issues and analyzing how Liberal members communicate with voters.“Preliminary work was done by Eunoia Technologies but after seeing what was offered, Liberal Caucus Research Bureau decided not to move forward.” Ms. Cotton said, without explaining why it cut ties.Mr. Wylie’s time in Ottawa, however, brought to light something that most people have overlooked. Unlike businesses and the federal government itself, federal political parties aren’t subject to Canada’s internet privacy and data protection laws.Some of those laws date to the 1980s and the federal privacy commissioner, among others, has been calling for a 21st century update. But while Canada lags behind Europe in this area, it’s still well ahead of the United States.The political party exemption came about in part because of a parliamentary tradition of not giving bureaucrats or outside bodies control over a party’s affairs. I called Michael Pal, an assistant law professor at the University of Ottawa who studies election laws and related issues like voter suppression, and asked if it’s time for a change.“Every other sector is covered by privacy laws but political parties,” he said. “They are all using data so I don’t think there is a good argument about why they should be under privacy rules.”As for concerns about encroaching on Parliament, Professor Pal isn’t buying that either. He noted that parties were already “heavily regulated” through Elections Canada and election fund-raising laws.So what’s a Facebook user to do now? My colleague Brian X. Chen, who writes about consumer technology, has offered some guidance on minimizing privacy risks on Facebook, although his overall take on the situation facing Facebook users is a little discouraging:What about deleting old Facebook and Twitter posts? Brian tried it and found that his “delete-everything approach was probably not worth most people’s time. And even after all that time, my Facebook timeline was still decorated with posts that my friends had published about me — including photos from my 21st birthday (need I say more?) — because that content was not mine to delete.”That, of course, leaves the option of quitting social media. And that’s what I’m interested in hearing about from you. Have the last couple of weeks turned your mind toward leaving Facebook or other social media sites? If you’re inclined, do you think it’s possible to leave? And if you leave, what will you lose and what will you gain? Please send your thoughts to nytcanada@nytimes.com.Read: How Trump Consultants Exploited the Facebook Data of MillionsRead: Cambridge Analytica Whistle-Blower Contends Data-Mining Swung Brexit VoteRead: How to Protect Yourself (and Your Friends) on FacebookRead: Want to Purge Your Social Media Timelines? Can You Spare a Few Hours?About a year ago, I wrote about how the house where the Dionne quintuplets were born faced an uncertain future. The birth, and survival, of the quints at the height of the Great Depression was both a global sensation and a tale of grave injustice. The girls were taken from their family and made wards of the province of Ontario, ostensibly to protect them from exploitation. But the government turned around and exhibited almost like zoo animals. Millions of visitors viewed them from a special gallery.Other injustices and misfortune followed the five through their lives. The decision by the City of North Bay to turn over the log house to a village without the obvious means to maintain or restore it looked like the latest one.But much has changed in the past year. After a public campaign, North Bay reversed its decision, and the house has been moved to downtown where it will become a museum.And this week, The Historic Sites and Monuments Board of Canada designated the birth of the quints an event of national historical significance.Carlo Tarini, a friend who acts as the family’s spokesman, told me this week that Annette and Cécile, the two surviving sisters, are doing well, although Cécile was hospitalized for a time in January because of pneumonia.“In the pre-internet decades of the 30s and 40s, the worldwide fascination they sparked as children brings shade to the Kardashian kids popularity,” Mr. Tarini wrote in an email.Read: 2 Survivors of Canada’s First Quintuplet Clan Reluctantly Re-emerge—The Protestant churches involved in a system that took Indigenous children away from their families to boarding schools apologized for their role in during the 1990s. While the Truth and Reconciliation Commission has asked Pope Francis to follow suit, he rejected the idea.—Alexandre Bissonnette, who killed six men at a mosque in Quebec City last year, pleaded guilty to first degree murder this week. While the move brought relief to survivors and the families of victims, the lack of a trial means that questions about his transformation from university student to killer may go unanswered.—Rusty Staub, le Grand Orange to Montrealers, has died at the age of 73. During his time with the Montreal Expos, Mr. Staub endeared himself to Quebecers on the field.—Peter Munk, who created one of Canada’s biggest business fiascos at Clairtone and then rebounded to build the world’s largest gold mining company, has died at the age of 90 in Toronto.BRUSSELS —  Facebook has confirmed that the data of 2.7 million EU citizens were among those improperly used by political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, the EU executive said on Friday.The European Commission said it received a letter from the social media giant late on Thursday and that it would press for more details, piling pressure on the firm that has lost more than $100 billion in market value in the last 10 days."Facebook confirmed to us that the data of overall up to 2.7 million Europeans or people in the EU to be more precise may have been improperly shared with Cambridge Analytica," a Commission spokesman said."The letter also explains the steps Facebook has taken in response since."(Reporting by Alissa de Carbonnel @AdeCar; Editing by Robert-Jan Bartunek)VANCOUVER —  The Canadian federal agency charged with protecting privacy rights of individuals said on Thursday that it, along with its counterpart in British Columbia, will jointly investigate Facebook Inc and Canadian data firm AggregateIQ, over an ongoing data sharing scandal.The Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada said the probes, which broaden two existing investigations, will look at whether the companies broke federal and provincial personal privacy rules.Canada's privacy commissioner launched an investigation of Facebook in March after the New York Times and London's Observer newspaper broke news of the use of Facebook data by political consultancy Cambridge Analytica.Facebook Canada said on Wednesday that more than 600,000 Canadians had their data "improperly shared" with Cambridge Analytica.British Columbia's privacy commissioner was separately investigating AggregateIQ over whether the Victoria-based company had broken provincial personal privacy rules for its role in the Brexit campaign.The two agencies will now jointly investigate the companies, as they are subject to both federal and provincial personal privacy laws.(Reporting by Julie Gordon in Vancouver; Editing by Chris Reese and Richard Chang)SAN FRANCISCO —  Facebook Inc said on Wednesday that the personal information of up to 87 million users, mostly in the United States, may have been improperly shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, up from a previous news media estimate of more than 50 million.Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said in a conference call with reporters that Facebook had not seen "any meaningful impact" on usage or ad sales since the scandal, although he added, "it's not good" if people are unhappy with the company.Shares rose more than 3 percent after the bell.Zuckerberg told reporters that he accepted blame for the data leak, which has angered users, advertisers and lawmakers, while also saying he was still the right person to head the company he founded."When you're building something like Facebook that is unprecedented in the world, there are going to be things that you mess up," Zuckerberg said, adding that the important thing was to learn from mistakes.He said he was not aware of any discussions on the Facebook board about him stepping down, although directors would face a challenge if they wanted to oust him because Zuckerberg is the controlling shareholder.He said he had not fired anyone over the scandal and did not plan to. "I'm not looking to throw anyone else under the bus for mistakes that we made here," he said.Facebook first acknowledged last month that personal information about millions of users wrongly ended up in the hands of Cambridge Analytica.Zuckerberg will testify about the matter next Tuesday and Wednesday during two U.S. congressional hearings.London-based Cambridge Analytica, which has counted U.S. President Donald Trump's 2016 campaign among its clients, disputed Facebook's estimate of affected users. It said in a tweet on Wednesday that it received no more than 30 million records from a researcher it hired to collect data about people on Facebook.Zuckerberg, on the call with reporters, said Facebook should have done more to audit and oversee third-party app developers like the one that Cambridge Analytica hired in 2014."Knowing what I know today, clearly we should have done more," he said.Going forward, he said, Facebook was taking steps to restrict which personal data is available to third-party app developers, and he said it might take two more years to fix Facebook's problems. (https://bit.ly/2Ejpktb)"We're broadening our view of our responsibility," Zuckerberg said.Most of the up to 87 million people whose data was shared with Cambridge Analytica were in the United States, Facebook Chief Technology Officer Mike Schroepfer wrote in a blog post. (Graphic: https://bit.ly/2q5r5pl)Shares in Facebook closed down 0.6 percent on Wednesday to $155.10. They have tumbled more than 16 percent since the Cambridge Analytica scandal broke.The previous estimate of more than 50 million Facebook users affected by the data leak came from two newspapers, the New York Times and London's Observer, based on their investigations of Cambridge Analytica.Zuckerberg said Facebook came to the higher estimate by looking at the number of people who had downloaded a personality quiz app created by Cambridge University academic Aleksandr Kogan, or about 270,000 people, and then adding in the number of friends they had.Cambridge Analytica has said that it engaged Kogan "in good faith" to collect Facebook data in a manner similar to how other third-party app developers have harvested personal information.The scandal has kicked off investigations by Britain's Information Commissioner's Office, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission and by some 37 U.S. state attorneys general.Nigeria's government will investigate allegations of improper involvement by Cambridge Analytica in that country's 2007 and 2015 elections, a presidency spokesman said on Monday.(Reporting by David Ingram in San Francisco; Additional reporting by Arjun Panchadar in Bengaluru and Eric Auchard in London; Editing by Lisa Shumaker)LONDON —  Facebook's Chief Technology Officer Mike Schroepfer will answer questions from British lawmakers on the social media giant's recent data scandal on April 26, a parliamentary  committee said on Friday.Facebook Inc said on Wednesday the personal information of up to 87 million users, mostly in the United States, may have been improperly shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, up from a previous estimates.Lawmakers had asked Facebook chief executive Mark Zuckerberg or another senior Facebook executive to explain to a parliamentary committee how the data got into Cambridge Analytica's hands. Committee chair Damien Collins has said it was "astonishing" that Zuckerberg was not prepared to answer questions himself.The Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee said it would also hear from former Cambridge Analytica chief executive Alexander Nix on April 18, his second hearing, as well as from Aleksandr Kogan, a research associate at the centre of the scandal, on 24 April.(Reporting by Alistair Smout; editing by Stephen Addison)JAKARTA, Indonesia —  Indonesian government said Friday it is investigating Facebook over the privacy breach of its Indonesian users.The Ministry of Communications and Information Technology said in a statement that it had asked the National Police chief to investigate possible violations of Indonesia's privacy law a day after Facebook announced that personal data of more than 1 million Indonesians might have been exposed by political consultant Cambridge Analytica.It said Facebook representatives in Indonesia could face up to 12 years in prison and a fine of $871,000, if convicted.The ministry summoned the representatives late Thursday to deliver a warning letter.Communications Minister Rudiantara told reporters after the meeting that he has asked Facebook to stop its applications that could allow third parties to get users' personal information."We ask Facebook to provide us their audit results to see how the personal information is used by the Cambridge Analytica," said Rudiantara, who like many Indonesians uses a single name.Facebook Indonesia Head of Public Policy Ruben Hattari said they will keep cooperating with the Indonesian government."Our main goal is to secure privacy data of all Facebook users," Hattari said after the meeting.Indonesia is the world's fourth-largest Facebook user with more than 115 million active members, and nearly 97 percent of them are on mobile devices.WASHINGTON —  Facebook Inc Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg will testify next week before congressional committees over a political consulting firm's misuse of customer data to interfere in the U.S. presidential election, U.S. lawmakers said on Wednesday.Zuckerberg will appear before a joint hearing of the U.S. Senate Judiciary and Commerce committees on April 10 and the U.S. House Energy and Commerce Committee on April 11, the panels said on Wednesday."This hearing will be an important opportunity to shed light on critical consumer data privacy issues and help all Americans better understand what happens to their personal information online," the House panel's Republican chairman, Greg Walden, and top Democrat, Frank Pallone, said in a statement.Facebook has come under fire in recent weeks after it was disclosed that political consulting firm Cambridge Analytica, which worked for Donald Trump's presidential campaign, gained access to the personal data of 50 million Facebook users.Facebook said in March it had suspended the accounts of Cambridge Analytica and its parent company and hired forensic auditors to probe whether Cambridge Analytica still had the data.The technology company also said at the time it would investigate all applications that had gotten access to large amounts of data before the firm changed its platform in 2014, would further restrict developers' data access and roll out a tool to let users more easily revoke access by applications to their data.Zuckerberg said in March he would testify before Congress, but turned down an invitation by British lawmakers to explain to a parliamentary committee what had happened.The company has faced pressure to do more, both in terms of protecting user privacy and stopping "information warfare" on its platform.In February, 13 Russian nationals were indicted for using Facebook and other social media sites to interfere in the U.S. presidential election.On Tuesday, Facebook said it had removed hundreds of accounts and pages associated with the Russia-based Internet Research Agency that included fake activist and political posts in the 2016 U.S. election campaign.American spy agencies have warned that Russia would try to interfere in the 2018 congressional elections by using social media to spread propaganda.Shares in Facebook closed down 0.6 percent on Wednesday to $155.10. They have tumbled more than 16 percent since the Cambridge Analytica scandal broke.(Reporting by Makini Brice; Additional reporting by Eric Beech; Editing by Jeffrey Benkoe and Peter Cooney)SYDNEY —  Australia's Privacy Commissioner said on Thursday she had opened a formal investigation into social media giant Facebook Inc after the company confirmed data from 300,000 Australian users may have been used without authorisation.The investigation will consider whether Facebook has breached Australia's privacy laws, Privacy Commissioner Angelene Falk said in a statement.Facebook said on Wednesday that the personal information of up to 87 million users, mostly in the United States, may have been improperly shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, up from a previous news media estimate of more than 50 million.(Reporting by Tom Westbrook; Editing by Michael Perry)BERLIN —  German Justice Minister Katarina Barley said she planned a further meeting with Facebook to discuss the impact of its algorithms on the social network's users, adding that recent disclosures of privacy violations were probably not isolated.Facebook said on Wednesday that the personal information of up to 87 million users, mostly in the United States, may have been improperly shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, more than previous estimates."I plan a further discussion with Facebook to discuss the question of algorithms [which] govern how people are categorized according to their usage of data," Barley told reporters on Thursday.Data privacy is a sensitive subject in Germany, where memories of the two 20th-century police states on its territory have spurred the government to take a leading role in pushing for tighter regulation of data-driven Internet giants.A poll for ARD public television found that 61 percent of Germany's internet users were concerned that their data had been misused, though only 12 percent said they had cut back on Facebook usage. A further 2 percent had stopped altogether.The meeting with Barley will be the social network's second such summons from the German government since the New York Times and London's Observer newspaper broke news of the use of its data by Cambridge Analytica on March 16. Facebook shares have since lost 16 percent, wiping more than $80 billion from its market value."We should have no illusions: the Cambridge Analytica cases won't be the only ones and Facebook is probably not the only Internet giant where similar doubtful cases occurred," Barley said on Thursday. "It's probably just the tip of the iceberg."Earlier, the British Information Commissioner's Office (ICO) said Facebook was co-operating with its examination into how 30 organizations have used personal data, but that it was too early to say whether the social media giant had done enough.The ICO said it was looking at how data was collected from a third party app on Facebook and shared with Cambridge Analytica, as well as a broader investigation into how social media platforms have been used in political campaigning.(Reporting by Thomas Escritt; Editing by Paul Carrel and Catherine Evans)WASHINGTON —  Investigators on two congressional panels are looking into whether Russia acquired the data of millions of Facebook users and if companies with ties to then-2016 Republican election candidate Donald Trump's campaign played any role in providing it, three sources familiar with the inquiries said.On Tuesday, Facebook said it had deleted 70 Facebook accounts, 138 Facebook pages and 65 Instagram accounts that it said were "controlled" by the Internet Research Agency (IRA), a Russian propaganda arm based in St. Petersburg.Last September, Facebook disclosed that it had suspended about 470 "inauthentic accounts" that it believed were "likely operated out of Russia" and had purchased 3,000 ads which "appeared to focus on amplifying divisive social and political messages."And on Wednesday, the social media platform said the personal information of up to 87 million users, mostly in the United States, may have been improperly shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, up from a previous news media estimate of more than 50 million. Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg will testify on April 10 and 11 to Congress.In an indictment in February, Robert Mueller, the special counsel investigating possible Russian meddling in the 2016 U.S. presidential campaign, charged IRA and 13 Russians with conspiring to interfere in U.S. politics and elections. Moscow denies tampering in U.S. elections and President Trump denies any coordination between his campaign and Russian officials.Among the issues investigators on the U.S. Senate Intelligence Committee and Democrats on the House Intelligence Committee are digging into are whether IRA and other Russian organizations used any Facebook data, the sources said, speaking on condition of anonymity. Also, whether the use of such data had any impact on the U.S. election, and how much Facebook data may have been acquired by Russian entities, the sources said.Zuckerberg last month disclosed that in 2013, Cambridge University academic Aleksandr Kogan, who ran a company called Global Science Research (GSR), created a personality quiz app that was installed by about 300,000 Facebook users.Zuckerberg said that because of the way the Facebook platform worked at the time, this gave Kogan access to data of "tens of millions" of friends of users who took the quiz.On Wednesday, Mike Schroepfer, Facebook's Chief Technology Officer, acknowledged in a public posting that "the Facebook information of up to 87 million people - mostly in the US - may have been improperly shared" with Cambridge Analytica.Zuckerberg said Facebook learned in 2015 that Kogan shared data from his app with Cambridge Analytica. The London-based consulting firm received millions of dollars from the Trump campaign and a political action committee supported by financier Robert Mercer, who supported Trump. Zuckerberg said Kogan "misused" Facebook's data.Cambridge Analytica said in a statement on Wednesday that it "did not use any" data it acquired from Kogan's company in work related to the 2016 U.S. presidential campaign. The firm added that it took legal action against GSR, and that it "immediately deleted the raw data" from its server when it learned from Facebook that the data had been "improperly obtained."Representative Adam Schiff, the House intelligence committee's top Democrat, sent Kogan a letter requesting correspondence and message traffic on his dealings with Cambridge Analytica and former Trump adviser Steve Bannon, any material related to Russia, and that Kogan agree to an interview.Kogan said in an email to Reuters that he knows nothing about Facebook data being obtained by Russia and had never heard of the Internet Research Agency "until a few weeks ago."(Reporting By Mark Hosenball; editing by John Walcott and Grant McCool)BRUSSELS —  The European Union said Friday that Facebook has told it that up to 2.7 million people in the 28-nation bloc may have been victim of improper data sharing involving political data-mining firm Cambridge Analytica.EU spokesman Christian Wigand said EU Justice Commissioner Vera Jourova will have a telephone call with Facebook COO Sheryl Sandberg early next week to address the massive data leaks.The EU and Facebook will be looking at what changes the social media giant needs to make to better protect users and how the U.S. company must adapt to new EU data protection rules.Wigand said that EU data protection authorities will discuss over the coming days "a strong coordinated approach" on how to deal with the Facebook investigation.Separately, Italy's competition authority opened an investigation Friday into Facebook for allegedly misleading practices following revelations that the social network sold users' data without consent.Authority chairman Giovanni Pitruzzella told Sky News24 that the investigation will focus on Facebook's claims on its home page that the service is free, without revealing that it makes money off users' data.The investigation comes as Italian consumer advocate group Codacons prepares a U.S. class action against Facebook on behalf of Italians whose data was mined by Cambridge Analytica. Codacons said just 57 Italians downloaded the Cambridge Analytica app, but that an estimated 214,000 Italians could be affected because the data mined extended to also the users' friends.A top Facebook privacy official is scheduled to meet with the authority later this month.___This story was earlier corrected to show that the EU call will take place with Facebook COO Sheryl Sandberg not with Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg.NEW DELHI —  India's government has sent a notice to Facebook asking whether the personal data of Indian voters and users has been compromised by U.K.-based Cambridge Analytica or any other downstream entity.A similar notice was dispatched to Cambridge Analytica last week following media reports that it had misused data to profile Indians and influence their elections. The government set a Saturday deadline for Cambridge Analytica and April 7 for Facebook to respond to its inquiry.Facebook is facing unprecedented scrutiny following reports that the data mining firm used ill-gotten data from tens of millions of its users to try to influence elections.India's Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology said in a statement late Wednesday that Facebook has its largest footprint in India in terms of its user base and sought to know "what proactive measures it is taking to ensure the safety, security and privacy of such large user data and to prevent its misuse by any third party."The governing Bharatiya Janata Party and the main opposition Congress Party have accused each other of utilizing the services of the British company, but denied any link with it. Cambridge Analytica's allegedly unauthorized harvesting of Facebook data and a series of leaks linked to India's biometric database has refocused public attention on digital privacy in the country.Digital law experts say Indian regulations offered particularly weak safeguards against data breach.The Indian government's notice to Facebook sought to know "whether Facebook or its related or downstream agencies utilizing Facebook's data have previously been engaged by any entities to manipulate the Indian electoral process.""If any such downstream entity misused data from Facebook, what is the protection available to the data subject?" it asked.WASHINGTON —  Facebook Inc Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg will testify next week before congressional committees over a political consulting firm's misuse of customer data to interfere in the U.S. presidential election, U.S. lawmakers said on Wednesday.    Zuckerberg will appear before a joint hearing of the U.S. Senate Judiciary and Commerce committees on April 10 and the U.S. House Energy and Commerce Committee on April 11, the panels said on Wednesday."This hearing will be an important opportunity to shed light on critical consumer data privacy issues and help all Americans better understand what happens to their personal information online," the House panel's Republican chairman, Greg Walden, and top Democrat, Frank Pallone, said in a statement.Facebook has come under fire in recent weeks after it was disclosed that political consulting firm Cambridge Analytica, which worked for Donald Trump's presidential campaign, gained access to the personal data of 50 million Facebook users.Facebook said in March it had suspended the accounts of Cambridge Analytica and its parent company and hired forensic auditors to probe whether Cambridge Analytica still had the data.The technology company also said at the time it would investigate all applications that had gotten access to large amounts of data before the firm changed its platform in 2014, would further restrict developers' data access and roll out a tool to let users more easily revoke access by applications to their data.Zuckerberg said in March he would testify before Congress, but turned down an invitation by British lawmakers to explain to a parliamentary committee what had happened.The company has faced pressure to do more, both in terms of protecting user privacy and stopping "information warfare" on its platform.In February, 13 Russian nationals were indicted for using Facebook and other social media sites to interfere in the U.S. presidential election.On Tuesday, Facebook said it had removed hundreds of accounts and pages associated with the Russia-based Internet Research Agency that included fake activist and political posts in the 2016 U.S. election campaign.American spy agencies have warned that Russia would try to interfere in the 2018 congressional elections by using social media to spread propaganda.Shares in Facebook closed down 0.6 percent on Wednesday to $155.10. They have tumbled more than 16 percent since the Cambridge Analytica scandal broke.(Reporting by Makini Brice; Additional reporting by Eric Beech; Editing by Jeffrey Benkoe and Peter Cooney)WASHINGTON —  Investigators on two congressional panels are looking into whether Russia acquired the data of millions of Facebook users and if companies with ties to then-2016 Republican election candidate Donald Trump's campaign played any role in providing it, three sources familiar with the inquiries said.On Tuesday, Facebook said it had deleted 70 Facebook accounts, 138 Facebook pages and 65 Instagram accounts that it said were "controlled" by the Internet Research Agency (IRA), a  Russian propaganda arm based in St. Petersburg.Last September, Facebook disclosed that it had suspended about 470 "inauthentic accounts" that it believed were "likely operated out of Russia" and had purchased 3,000 ads which "appeared to focus on amplifying divisive social and political messages."And on Wednesday, the social media platform said the personal information of up to 87 million users, mostly in the United States, may have been improperly shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, up from a previous news media estimate of more than 50 million. Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg will testify on April 10 and 11 to Congress.In an indictment in February, Robert Mueller, the special counsel investigating possible Russian meddling in the 2016 U.S. presidential campaign, charged IRA and 13 Russians with conspiring to interfere in U.S. politics and elections. Moscow denies tampering in U.S. elections and President Trump denies any coordination between his campaign and Russian officials.Among the issues investigators on the U.S. Senate Intelligence Committee and Democrats on the House Intelligence Committee are digging into are whether IRA and other Russian organizations used any Facebook data, the sources said, speaking on condition of anonymity. Also, whether the use of such data had any impact on the U.S. election, and how much Facebook data may have been acquired by Russian entities, the sources said.Zuckerberg last month disclosed that in 2013, Cambridge University academic Aleksandr Kogan, who ran a company called Global Science Research (GSR), created a personality quiz app that was installed by about 300,000 Facebook users.Zuckerberg said that because of the way the Facebook platform worked at the time, this gave Kogan access to data of "tens of millions" of friends of users who took the quiz.On Wednesday, Mike Schroepfer, Facebook's Chief Technology Officer, acknowledged in a public posting that "the Facebook information of up to 87 million people - mostly in the US - may have been improperly shared" with Cambridge Analytica.Zuckerberg said Facebook learned in 2015 that Kogan shared data from his app with Cambridge Analytica. The London-based consulting firm received millions of dollars from the Trump campaign and a political action committee supported by financier Robert Mercer, who supported Trump. Zuckerberg said Kogan "misused" Facebook's data.Cambridge Analytica said in a statement on Wednesday that it "did not use any" data it acquired from Kogan's company in work related to the 2016 U.S. presidential campaign. The firm added that it took legal action against GSR, and that it "immediately deleted the raw data" from its server when it learned from Facebook that the data had been "improperly obtained."Representative Adam Schiff, the House intelligence committee's top Democrat, sent Kogan a letter requesting correspondence and message traffic on his dealings with Cambridge Analytica and former Trump adviser Steve Bannon, any material related to Russia, and that Kogan agree to an interview.Kogan said in an email to Reuters that he knows nothing about Facebook data being obtained by Russia and had never heard of the Internet Research Agency "until a few weeks ago."(Reporting By Mark Hosenball; editing by John Walcott and Grant McCool)NEW YORK —  Facebook Inc Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg plans to testify before U.S. Congress, a source briefed on the matter said on Tuesday, as he bows to pressure from lawmakers insisting he explain how 50 million users' data ended up in the hands of a political consultancy.Lawmakers in the United States and Europe are demanding to know more about the company's privacy practices after a whistleblower said consultancy Cambridge Analytica improperly accessed data to target U.S. and British voters in close-run elections.Facebook said the company had received invitations to testify before Congress and that they were talking to legislators.Facebook shares closed down 4.9 percent on Tuesday and have fallen almost 18 percent since March 16, when Facebook first acknowledged that user data had been improperly channelled to Cambridge Analytica, which was hired by Donald Trump's 2016 presidential campaign.The tech sector is down 5.2 percent for March and on track for its worst month since April 2016. The data breach has raised investor concerns that any failure by big tech companies to protect privacy could deter advertisers and lead to tougher regulation.House Energy and Commerce Committee spokeswoman Elena Hernandez said "The committee is continuing to work with Facebook to determine a day and time for Mr. Zuckerberg to testify".On the same day, Zuckerberg turned down British lawmakers' invitations to explain to a British parliamentary committee what went wrong.The company said it would instead send one of his deputies, suggesting that Chief Technology Officer Mike Schroepfer or Chief Product Officer Chris Cox had the expertise to answer questions on the complex subject.The head of the committee called Zuckerberg's decision "astonishing" and urged him to think again.Christopher Wylie, the whistleblower who once worked at Cambridge Analytica, said on Monday that Canadian company AggregateIQ had developed the software that used the algorithms from the Facebook data to target Republican voters in the 2016 U.S. election.AggregateIQ did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Wylie's remarks. Cambridge Analytica said it had not shared any of the Facebook profile data with AggregateIQ.Cambridge Analytica has said it did not use Facebook data in Trump's campaign, and that it had deleted all Facebook data it obtained from a third-party app in 2014 after learning the information did not adhere to data protection rules.In full-page advertisements in British and U.S. newspapers this week Zuckerberg said the app built by a university researcher "leaked Facebook data of millions of people in 2014".He apologised last week for the mistakes the company had made and promised to restrict developers' access to user information as part of a plan to protect privacy.The U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee said on Monday it had invited Zuckerberg, as well as the CEOs of Alphabet Inc and Twitter Inc to testify at an April 10 hearing on data privacy.The U.S. House Energy and Commerce Committee and U.S. Senate Commerce Committee had already formally asked Zuckerberg to appear at a congressional hearing.The U.S. Federal Trade Commission took the unusual step of announcing on Monday that it had opened an investigation into the company - which it generally only does in cases of great public interest - citing media reports that raise what it called "substantial concerns about the privacy practices of Facebook."(Writing by Susan Thomas; Editing by James Dalgleish)SYDNEY —  Australian authorities say they are investigating whether Facebook breached the country's privacy law when personal information of more than 300,000 Australian users was obtained by Cambridge Analytica, a Trump-linked political consulting firm, without their authorization.Privacy Commissioner Angelene Falk said Thursday that the Privacy Act requires all organizations to ensure personal information is held securely. Customers must also be adequately notified about the collection and handling of personal information.Each breach of the Privacy Act can involve a 420,000 Australian dollar fine ($323,000). The privacy commissioner can also seek a court injunction and require offenders to pledge, under threat of further court action, to prevent further breaches.Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg will testify before Congress next week. His appearance comes as authorities around the world investigate allegations that the political data-mining firm Cambridge Analytica inappropriately accessed data on as many as 87 million Facebook users to influence elections.Here's a look at the various investigations and requests for information.___IN THE UNITED STATES:— CONGRESS: Zuckerberg is set to testify April 10 in a joint hearing of the Senate Commerce and Judiciary Committees and April 11 before the House Energy and Commerce Committee. This will be his first-ever testimony before Congress. Individual congressional members have also written Facebook seeking answers.— FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION: Tom Pahl, acting director of the FTC's Bureau of Consumer Protection, says the agency's probe will include whether the company engaged in "unfair acts" that cause "substantial injury" to consumers. Facebook reached a settlement with the FTC in 2011 offering privacy assurances, though the FTC's probe may extend to Facebook's compliance with U.S.-EU principles for transferring data.— INDIVIDUAL STATES: The attorneys general for 37 U.S. states and territories have written a letter seeking details on how Facebook monitored what app developers did with data collected on Facebook users and whether Facebook had safeguards to prevent misuse.___IN EUROPE:— EUROPEAN UNION: The EU is contacting data protection authorities in its member nations and in the United States to better follow up investigations into whether Facebook breached EU privacy laws.— U.K. INFORMATION COMMISSION: Britain's information regulator has seized evidence from the London office of Cambridge Analytica. Information Commissioner Elizabeth Denham has said the prime allegation against Cambridge Analytica is that it acquired personal data in an unauthorized way.— U.K. PARLIAMENT: The U.K. parliamentary media committee has summoned Zuckerberg to testify. The chairman, Damian Collins, says his panel has repeatedly asked Facebook how it uses data. He says Facebook officials "have been misleading to the committee."___ELSEWHERE:— AUSTRALIA: Australian authorities say they are investigating whether Facebook breached the country's privacy law, which requires organizations to ensure personal information is held securely.— INDIA: India's government has sent a notice to Facebook asking whether the personal data of Indian users has been compromised.LONDON —  Brexit donor Arron Banks said on Thursday Britain's data watchdog has joined the "wild unicorn chasing pack" of supporters wanting to remain in the European Union.Banks said he was asked to provide information as part of the Information Commissioner's investigation into whether data analytics were used to sway public opinion during the 2016 referendum on whether to leave the European Union.The Information Commissioner "appears to have joined the 'wild unicorn' chasing pack of 'Remainers' ..," Banks said in a statement.The watchdog is investigating the work of the political consultancy Cambridge Analytica and whether the company misled the public about work it did for a pro-Brexit group run by Banks before the vote to leave the EU.(Reporting By Andrew MacAskill; editing by Stephen Addison)NEW YORK —  The Latest on Facebook's privacy scandal (all times local):8:35 p.m.Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg has agreed to testify in a second congressional hearing next week, this time in the Senate.Zuckerberg will appear at a rare joint hearing of the Senate Judiciary and Commerce Committees on April 10.Earlier Wednesday, the House Energy and Commerce Committee announced that Zuckerberg would be testifying at a hearing on April 11.Lawmakers have called for Zuckerberg to appear personally after revelations that Cambridge Analytica, a Trump-linked political consulting firm, obtained data of tens of millions of users without their permission with the intent of swaying elections. The company has also been under scrutiny after Russians used Facebook and other social media to meddle in the 2016 elections.Zuckerberg will be the only witness at the hearing.___5:15 p.m.Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg says fixing the company's problems will take many years.In a conference call with reporters Wednesday, Zuckerberg said he wishes he could snap his fingers and solve everything in three to six months. But, he said, "these are big issues" and a big shift for Facebook.That says, he says the company will have "turned a corner" on a lot of these issues by the end of the year.Zuckerberg has set fixing Facebook as his personal challenge for 2018.The issues Facebook needs to address go beyond the privacy scandal involving Trump-affiliated consulting firm Cambridge Analytica. Facebook also has been dealing with fake news, the use of Facebook to spread hate and discord and concerns about social media's effect on people's mental well-being.___4:20 p.m.Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg is admitting to mistakes and says his company hasn't taken a broad enough view of what its responsibility is in the world.In a call with media on Wednesday, Zuckerberg calls this a "huge mistake" and added, "it's my mistake."Referring to the Cambridge Analytica privacy scandal, he said that it isn't enough for Facebook to believe app developers when they say they follow the rules. He says Facebook has to ensure they do.Earlier in the day, Facebook revealed that as many as 87 million people might have had their data accessed by Cambridge Analytica — an increase from the 50 million disclosed in published reports.___2:45 p.m.Facebook is restricting the user data it allows outsiders to access as part of steps it's taking to address the fallout from its worst privacy crisis in years.The company is reeling from news that a Trump-affiliated data-mining firm used ill-gotten data from millions of users to try to influence elections. Facebook says as many as 87 million people may have had their data accessed — an increase from the 50 million disclosed in published reports.Among the latest changes: Facebook is restricting access that apps can get about users' events, as well as information about groups such as member lists and content.In addition, the company is also removing the option to search for users by entering a phone number or an email address. While this helped individuals find friends who may have a common name, Facebook says businesses that had phone or email information on customers were able to collect profile information this way.___2:30 p.m.Facebook says as many as 87 million people may have had their data accessed in the Cambridge Analytica scandal — an increase from the 50 million disclosed in published reports.Cambridge Analytica, a data-mining firm affiliated with President Donald Trump's campaign, has been accused of using ill-gotten data from Facebook users to try to influence elections.This coming Monday, all Facebook users will receive a notice on their Facebook feeds with a link to see what apps they use and what information they have shared with those apps. They'll have a chance to delete apps they no longer want.Users who had their data shared with Cambridge Analytica will be told of that within that notice. Facebook says most of the affected users are in the U.S.___12:30 p.m.Now that Mark Zuckerberg is set to testify before Congress, he'll need advice not just from lawyers but from communications specialists, too, on addressing Facebook's privacy scandal.Public-relations experts who have prepped CEOs before say that congressional hearings are more political theater than public policy. The so-called "optics" — how things look — are as important as what you say.Other advice for the Facebook CEO? Appear sympathetic and be ready for a beating. Take responsibility. Don't feign ignorance.The stakes are high for Zuckerberg's April 11 appearance before the House Energy and Commerce Committee.___NoonFacebook's new privacy policy aims to explain the data it gathers on users more clearly — but doesn't actually change what it collects and shares.The company unveiled the revisions Wednesday as it faces one of its worst privacy scandals in history. Although Facebook says the changes aren't prompted by recent events, it's an opportune time. CEO Mark Zuckerberg is also set to testify before Congress next week for the first time.Among Wednesday's changes: Facebook has added a section explaining that it collects people's contact information, which may include call logs and text histories. The previous policy did not mention call logs or text histories. Several users were surprised to learn recently that Facebook had been collecting such data.___8:30 a.m.The leaders of a House oversight committee say Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg will testify before the panel on April 11.In an announcement Wednesday, Reps. Greg Walden and Frank Pallone say the hearing will focus on the Facebook's "use and protection of user data." Facebook is facing scrutiny over its data collection following allegations that the political consulting firm Cambridge Analytica obtained data on tens of millions of Facebook users to try to influence elections.Walden, R-Ore., is the House Energy and Commerce committee's chairman. Pallone of New Jersey is the panel's top ranking Democrat. They say the hearing will be "an important opportunity to shed light on critical consumer data privacy issues and help all Americans better understand what happens to their personal information online."NEW YORK —  The CEO of Facebook is defending its advertising-supported business model.Mark Zuckerberg's defense comes after Apple CEO Tim Cook said his company wouldn't be in Facebook's situation because Apple doesn't sell ads based on customer data the way Facebook does. Zuckerberg responded Monday that an advertising-supported business model is the only way that the service can survive because not everyone would be able to pay for Facebook if it charged a fee.He says the idea that Facebook doesn't care about its customers is "extremely glib."Facebook is facing scrutiny over its data collection following allegations that political consulting firm Cambridge Analytica obtained data on tens of millions of Facebook users to try to influence elections.Zuckerberg spoke with Vox , while Cook talked with Recode last week.SYDNEY —  Australia on Thursday said it had begun an investigation to decide whether social media giant Facebook Inc breached its privacy laws, after the company confirmed data from 300,000 Australian users may have been used without authorization.Personal information of up to 87 million users, mostly in the United States, may have been improperly shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, Facebook said on Wednesday, exceeding a media estimate of more than 50 million.In a statement, Australia's privacy commissioner, Angelene Falk, said her office would "confer with regulatory authorities internationally", given the global nature of the matter.A Facebook spokeswoman in Australia said the company would be "fully responsive" to the investigation and had recently updated some privacy settings.Facebook's chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, told reporters during a conference call that he accepted blame for the data leak.Zuckerberg is due to testify about the matter next week during two U.S. congressional hearings, and the data breach has drawn criticism from lawmakers and regulators around the world.London-based Cambridge Analytica, which has counted U.S. President Donald Trump's 2016 campaign among its clients, disputed Facebook's estimate of affected users.It said in a tweet on Wednesday that it received no more than 30 million records from a researcher it hired to collect data about people on Facebook.Australia's investigation follows comments by New Zealand's privacy commissioner last week that Facebook had broken laws in that country, a charge the company called disappointing.Australia's competition regulator is already investigating whether Facebook and Alphabet Inc's Google had disrupted the news media to the detriment of publishers and consumers.(Reporting by Tom Westbrook; Editing by Michael Perry and Clarence Fernandez)NEW YORK —  Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg prepares to face Congress on Tuesday, and No. 2 executive Sheryl Sandberg is on a media blitz as the company tries to contain swirling concerns about how it protects the data of its 2.2 billion members.Facing its most serious challenge in its 14-year-history, the social media juggernaut is seeking to maintain people's trust and avoid a user exodus.Here's a look at the scandal and what it means.___HOW DID THIS START?In mid-March, news broke that Cambridge Analytica, a London-based data-mining firm with ties to U.S. President Donald Trump, lifted the Facebook profiles of tens of millions of users without their permission in an attempt to sway elections.A former Cambridge Analytica employee, Christopher Wylie, said the firm got Facebook information through an app in order to build psychological profiles on a large portion of the U.S. electorate. That app vacuumed up information from users who gave the app permission to access their accounts — as well as additional data from their Facebook friends. About 270,000 people were paid to take part; tens of millions of their friends were also caught in the data dragnet.___WHY ARE PEOPLE MAD AT FACEBOOK?The crisis appears to have crystallized the anxiety many people feel about Facebook's enormous sway over daily life and its massive data trove.It comes on the heels of a revelation that Russia used the service to meddle in U.S. elections. It has also deepened concerns about the social media network's ability to avoid being exploited to spread propaganda and sway elections.And it has renewed questions about Facebook's ability to protect the privacy of its users while also exploiting their personal details to fuel its lucrative advertising business.Facebook's stock has fallen about 14 percent since the Cambridge Analytica story broke, more than the rest of the stock market has fallen . Some advertisers and users have left Facebook, although the company has said it hasn't been a significant number yet.___WHAT'S THE SCOPE OF THIS SCANDAL?The number of people affected seems to keep ballooning. On Wednesday, Facebook said that as many as 87 million people might have had their data accessed — up from the 50 million disclosed in previously published reports.And Facebook said it believes most of its 2.2 billion users have had their public profile information scraped by "malicious actors" at some point. That's through a feature that lets people search for users through their email address or phone number. While this helped individuals find friends, Facebook says malicious actors have also used this technique. Outside experts believe they could have been identity thieves, scam artists or shady data brokers assembling marketing profiles.On top of that, some users who logged in to Facebook through Android devices discovered that Facebook had been collecting phone call logs and text histories.___HOW HAS FACEBOOK RESPONDED?Zuckerberg and Sandberg were silent for five days following the initial report. Zuckerberg also was criticized for initially failing to apologize when he did break the silence.Since then, they've been on a major offensive, apologizing on national TV and rolling out new privacy policies. In a call with reporters Wednesday, Zuckerberg acknowledged he made a "huge mistake" in failing to take a broad enough view of what Facebook's responsibility is in the world.___IS FACEBOOK CHANGING ITS PRACTICES?Facebook has outlined a new privacy policy that aims to explain the data it gathers on users more clearly. It's also restricting access that apps can have to data about users' events, as well as information about groups such as member lists and content. In addition, the company is removing the option to search for users by entering a phone number or an email address.Facebook is trying to be more upfront with users. On Monday, all Facebook users will receive a notice on their Facebook feeds with a link to see what apps they use and what information they have shared with those apps. They'll have a chance to delete apps they no longer want. Users who might have had their data shared with Cambridge Analytica will be told of that.___WHY IS WASHINGTON INVOLVED?Congress has been interested in increasing regulation on Facebook due to its size and the myriad of issues it's facing. That includes data privacy, fake news and Russian meddling in the U.S. elections.Zuckerberg is set to testify on the privacy scandal Tuesday before a joint hearing of the Senate Commerce and Judiciary Committees, and a day later before the House Energy and Commerce Committee. The two sessions will be his first testimony before Congress. Separately, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission and various authorities in Europe are investigating.Meanwhile, special counsel Robert Mueller is scrutinizing the connections between Trump's campaign and Cambridge Analytica so he'll be interested in whatever Zuckerberg has to say, too.___AP Business Writers Alexandra Olson and Barbara Ortutay in New York contributed to this report.LONDON —  Facebook is co-operating with Britain's Information Commissioner's Office (ICO) as it examines how 30 organizations have used personal data, but the ICO said on Thursday it was too early to say whether the social media giant had done enough.On Wednesday, Facebook said the personal information of up to 87 million users, mostly in the United States, may have been improperly shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, more than previous estimates.The ICO said it was looking at how data was collected from a third party app on Facebook and shared with Cambridge Analytica, as well as a broader investigation into how social media platforms have been used in political campaigning."Facebook has been co-operating with us and, while I am pleased with the changes they are making, it is too early to say whether they are sufficient under the law," the information commissioner, Elizabeth Denham, said in a statement."As part of my investigation into the use of personal data and analytics by political campaigns, parties, social media companies and other commercial actors, the ICO is investigating 30 organizations, including Facebook."Britain's digital and media minister Matt Hancock said he would meet Facebook next week to discuss the scandal. Facebook shares are down over 10 percent since it first disclosed the leak."I expect Facebook to explain why they put the data of over a million of our citizens at risk," Hancock said in a tweet."This is completely unacceptable, and they must demonstrate this won't happen again."(Reporting by Alistair Smout; editing by Stephen Addison)Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg will testify before Congress next week, while an EU official plans to speak with Facebook's No. 2 executive, Sheryl Sandberg, over the company's data practices.Authorities around the world are investigating allegations that the political data-mining firm Cambridge Analytica inappropriately accessed data on as many as 87 million Facebook users to influence elections.Here's a look at the various investigations and requests for information.___IN THE UNITED STATES:— CONGRESS: Zuckerberg is set to testify April 10 in a joint hearing of the Senate Commerce and Judiciary Committees and April 11 before the House Energy and Commerce Committee. This will be his first-ever testimony before Congress. Individual congressional members have also written Facebook seeking answers.— FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION: Tom Pahl, acting director of the FTC's Bureau of Consumer Protection, says the agency's probe will include whether the company engaged in "unfair acts" that cause "substantial injury" to consumers. Facebook reached a settlement with the FTC in 2011 offering privacy assurances, though the FTC's probe may extend to Facebook's compliance with U.S.-EU principles for transferring data.— INDIVIDUAL STATES: The attorneys general for 37 U.S. states and territories have written a letter seeking details on how Facebook monitored what app developers did with data collected on Facebook users and whether Facebook had safeguards to prevent misuse.___IN EUROPE:— EUROPEAN UNION: The EU is contacting data protection authorities in its member nations and in the United States to better follow up investigations into whether Facebook breached EU privacy laws. EU spokesman Christian Wigand says EU Justice Commissioner Vera Jourova will have a telephone call next week with Sandberg.— U.K. INFORMATION COMMISSION: Britain's information regulator has seized evidence from the London office of Cambridge Analytica. Information Commissioner Elizabeth Denham has said the prime allegation against Cambridge Analytica is that it acquired personal data in an unauthorized way.— U.K. PARLIAMENT: The U.K. parliamentary media committee has summoned Zuckerberg to testify. The chairman, Damian Collins, says his panel has repeatedly asked Facebook how it uses data. He says Facebook officials "have been misleading to the committee."— ITALY: Italy's competition authority has opened an investigation. Authority chairman Giovanni Pitruzzella told Sky News24 that the investigation will focus on Facebook's claims on its home page that the service is free, without revealing that it makes money off users' data.___ELSEWHERE:— AUSTRALIA: Australian authorities say they are investigating whether Facebook breached the country's privacy law, which requires organizations to ensure personal information is held securely.— INDIA: India's government has sent a notice to Facebook asking whether the personal data of Indian users has been compromised.— INDONESIA: The Ministry of Communications and Information Technology says it has asked the National Police to investigate possible violations.WELLINGTON —  New Zealand's privacy commissioner joined international criticism against Facebook Inc, saying on Wednesday it has broken the law by declining a citizen access to personal information held on the accounts of other users.In a statement, the commissioner said that after being notified of its complaint, Facebook responded that it did not have to comply with the body's demand for the information.The commissioner "considers it necessary to publicly identify Facebook in order to highlight its demonstrated unwillingness to comply with the law, and to inform the New Zealand public of Facebook's position," the statement said.The commissioner's statement said "the social media company said the Privacy Act did not apply to it and it did not have to comply with the Commissioner's request to review the information requested by the complainant."The commissioner said its powers beyond demanding information were limited.A spokeswoman for Facebook said the company had investigated the complaint but had not been provided enough detail to fully resolve it."We are disappointed that the New Zealand Privacy Commissioner asked us to provide access to a year's worth of private data belonging to several people and then criticized us for protecting their privacy," she said."We scrutinize all requests to disclose personal data, particularly the contents of private messages, and will challenge those that are overly broad...Instead the Commissioner has made a broad and intrusive request for private data."Facebook has come into spotlight over the past week over its handling of data from millions of users.Lawmakers in the United States and Europe are demanding to know more about the company's privacy practices after a whistleblower said consultancy Cambridge Analytica improperly accessed data to target U.S. and British voters in elections.Cambridge Analytica has said it did not use Facebook data in U.S. President Donald Trump's campaign, and that it had deleted all Facebook data it obtained from a third-party app in 2014 after learning the information did not adhere to data protection rules.(Reporting by Marius Zaharia in WELLINGTON. Additional reporting by Melanie Burton in MELBOURNE; Editing by Richard Borsuk and Michael Perry)(Reuters) - Facebook Inc is giving users more control over their privacy by making data management easier and redesigning the settings menu, the company said on Wednesday, in the wake of a scandal over a breach that exposed the personal information of millions and was allegedly used by a political consultancy.The company also said it would propose in the coming weeks updates to the social media website's terms of service and data policy to better spell out what information it collects and how it uses it.The company has faced a global outcry after a whistleblower said that data from millions of users was improperly harvested by consultancy Cambridge Analytica to target U.S. and British voters in close-run elections.Facebook shares are down nearly 18 percent since March 16, when it first acknowledged that user data had been improperly channeled to Cambridge Analytica, eating away nearly $100 billion of the company's market value."We've heard loud and clear that privacy settings and other important tools are too hard to find, and that we must do more to keep people informed," Erin Egan, Facebook's chief privacy officer, and Ashlie Beringer, its deputy general counsel, said in a statement.In addition to redesigning its settings menu on mobile devices, Facebook said it is creating a new privacy shortcut menu where users would be able to better secure their accounts and control personal information. It would also allow users to review and delete data they have shared, including posts and search queries.Users would be able to download the data shared with Facebook, including uploaded photos, contacts added to their account, and posts on timelines.(Reporting by Philip George and Ismail Shakil in Bengaluru; Editing by Bernard Orr)(Reuters) - A civil rights group and some consumer groups said on Friday they would file a complaint with the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) alleging that Facebook Inc's use of facial recognition techniques threaten users' privacy.The social media company has come under fire after it was disclosed that political consulting firm Cambridge Analytica, which worked for Donald Trump's presidential campaign, gained access to the personal data of up to 87 million Facebook users.Facial recognition techniques are used by Facebook to help users tag their friends in photos on the social media platform."The scanning of facial images without express, affirmative consent is unlawful and must be enjoined," Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC) said. (https://bit.ly/2GXGWQF)People can choose whether or not to allow this technology and they can change their mind at any time. When someone has their setting turned off, we don't use this technology to identify them in photos, Facebook Deputy Chief Privacy Officer Rob Sherman said.In 2011, Facebook had settled privacy-related charges with the FTC, which were brought about by EPIC's complaints. (https://bit.ly/1U44BfY)EPIC and the consumer groups said on Friday that Facebook's use of facial recognition tools also violates terms of the 2011 settlement.(Reporting by Muvija M in Bengaluru; Editing by Shounak Dasgupta)NEW YORK —  The Latest on Facebook's privacy scandal (all times local):2:30 p.m.Facebook has been secretly deleting some messages CEO Mark Zuckerberg sent through its Messenger application, an option that hasn't been available to most of the social network's 2.2 billion users.The company says it has been removing Zuckerberg's messages from the inboxes of various people for several years. The recipients of Zuckerberg's messages weren't informed before that happened. Facebook is making the acknowledgement Friday after TechCrunch first reported the tactic.Facebook says it began erasing the messages of Zuckerberg and a few other top executives in 2014 after computer hackers obtained and released emails from Sony Pictures executives. The Sony messages included disparaging remarks about movie stars and other people in the entertainment industry.Although the ability to automatically delete sent texts hadn't been previously available, Facebook says it now plans to make it available to all users. The company apologized for not doing so sooner.The development comes as Facebook faces questions about trust in light of one of its worst privacy scandals in its 14-year history.___2 p.m.Facebook says it will require advertisers who want to run either political ads or so-called "issue ads" —which may not endorse a specific candidate or party but which discuss political topics— to verify themselves.Facebook is working to strengthen its system ahead of this year's U.S. midterm elections and other elections around the world. The company has already required political ads to verify who is paying for them and where the advertiser is located. The requirement for issue ads is new.In addition, Facebook says it will also require the administrators of pages with a "large number" of followers to verify their identities and addresses. The company did not specify what number of followers would trigger the requirement.The moves are intended to clamp down on fake pages and accounts such as those used to disrupt the 2016 presidential elections in the U.S. and elsewhere.___1:15 p.m.Facebook will begin alerting users whose private data may have been compromised in the Cambridge Analytica scandal starting Monday.All 2.2 billion Facebook users will receive a notice on their feeds titled "Protecting Your Information." It will have a link to information on which Facebook apps they use and what information they have shared with those apps.In addition, 87 million users whose data might have been shared with Cambridge Analytica will get a more detailed message informing them of that fact.The political data-mining firm allegedly used ill-gotten Facebook user data in its efforts to sway elections. Cambridge Analytica says it only ever received data on 30 million users.___9:40 a.m.Sheryl Sandberg says Facebook should have conducted an audit after learning that a political consultancy improperly accessed user data nearly three years ago.The company's chief operating officer told NBC's "Today" show that Facebook is now undertaking that audit. Sandberg said that at the time, Facebook received legal assurances that Cambridge Analytica had deleted the improperly obtained information.She says, "What we didn't do is the next step of an audit and we're trying to that now."The company is facing a global backlash over the improper data-sharing scandal. Hearings over the issue are scheduled in the U.S., and the European Union is considering what actions to take against the company.___6:45 a.m.The European Union says that Facebook has told it that up to 2.7 million people in the 28-nation bloc may have been victim of improper data sharing involving political data-mining firm Cambridge Analytica.EU spokesman Christian Wigand said Friday that EU Justice Commissioner Vera Jourova will have a telephone call with Facebook's chief operating officer, Sheryl Sandberg, early next week to address the massive data leaks.The EU and Facebook will be looking at what changes the social media giant needs to make to better protect users and how the U.S. company must adapt to new EU data protection rules.Wigand said that EU data protection authorities will discuss over the coming days "a strong coordinated approach" on how to deal with the Facebook investigation.___5 a.m.Civil society and rights groups in Myanmar say Facebook has failed to adequately act against online hate speech that incites violence against the country's Muslim minority.Phandeeyar, a digital innovation lab, and five other groups wrote an open letter to Facebook founder and CEO Mark Zuckerberg, challenging his contention in a recent interview that the social media platform had effectively combated hate speech targeting the Rohingya community that's being persecuted in western Myanmar.Htaike Htaike Aung, executive director of one of the groups, Myanmar ICT for Development Organization, says Facebook has been a useful tool for people in Myanmar to exercise freedom of expression, but it had failed to effectively enforce rules to make it a safe community for all.___4:15 a.m.Indonesia says Facebook is being investigated over the privacy breach of its Indonesian users.The Ministry of Communications and Information Technology says in a statement Friday it has asked the National Police to investigate possible violations of Indonesia's privacy law a day after Facebook announced that personal data of more than 1 million Indonesians might have been exposed by political consultant Cambridge Analytica.It says Facebook representatives in Indonesia could face up to 12 years in prison and a fine of $871,000, if convicted.The ministry has summoned the representatives late Thursday and asked Facebook to stop its applications that could allow third parties to get users' personal information.Facebook Indonesia Head of Public Policy Ruben Hattari says they will keep cooperating with the Indonesian government.LONDON —  The Latest on the Facebook privacy scandal (all times local):6:30 p.m.Britain's Information Commissioner says some 30 organizations — including Facebook — are being investigated to see how social media platforms were used in political campaigns.Information Commissioner Elizabeth Denham's statement Thursday comes a day after Facebook announced that tens of millions more people might have been exposed in the Cambridge Analytica privacy scandal than previously thought. In all, Facebook says as many as 87 million people might have had their data accessed.Denham says her office is "conducting a broader investigation into how social media platforms were used in political campaigning." She says the investigation could result in enforcement action.She says "Facebook has been co-operating with us and, while I am pleased with the changes they are making, it is too early to say whether they are sufficient under the law."___9:30 p.m. (Sydney time)The European Union is contacting data protection authorities in its member nations and in the United States to better follow up investigations into whether Facebook breached EU privacy laws when millions of people had their data accessed through a leak.EU spokesman Christian Wigand said on Thursday that the bloc's justice chief Vera Jourova would have "high-level contacts in the coming days" with Facebook officials and also reach out to data protection officials, including the British authority which is leading the European investigation.Facebook said Wednesday that as many as 87 million people might have had their data accessed."You can be sure that we will continue to follow these investigations by the relevant authorities closely," Wigand said.___4:30 p.m. (Sydney time)Australian authorities say they are investigating whether Facebook breached the country's privacy law when personal information of more than 300,000 Australian users was obtained by Cambridge Analytica, a Trump-linked political consulting firm, without their authorization.Privacy Commissioner Angelene Falk said Thursday that the Privacy Act requires all organizations to ensure personal information is held securely. Customers must also be adequately notified about the collection and handling of personal information.Each breach of the Privacy Act can involve a 420,000 Australian dollar fine ($323,000). The privacy commissioner can also seek a court injunction and require offenders to pledge, under threat of further court action, to prevent further breaches.JAKARTA —  Indonesia's communication ministry said it has asked Facebook Inc to confirm whether personal data from any of its citizens was shared with political consultancy Cambridge Analytica and is coordinating with police in case any laws were breached.Facebook said this week that the personal information of up to 87 million users may have been improperly shared with Cambridge Analytica.The social media giant has said most of the users appeared to be in the United States, but there have been reports that they included data from more than one million Indonesians."There is an indication that Indonesian Facebook users are part of Cambridge Analytica's data case. We are requesting an exact figure," Communications Minister Rudiantara said in a statement sent to Reuters by text message.The minister said he had also sought reassurances from Facebook that it was complying with an Indonesian government decree on private data protection and a law on electronic information and transactions.Breaches of the law can include criminal sanctions with a maximum penalty of up to 12 years in jail or a fine of 12 billion rupiah ($870,000).Asked for comment, Facebook said in an emailed statement: "We are strongly committed to protecting people's information, and we intend to make all the same privacy controls and settings available everywhere."The company had taken "significant steps to make our privacy tools easier to find, restrict data access on Facebook, and make our Terms and Data Policy clearer", it said.Facebook would "continue to work with privacy and information commissioners, and authorities, in Indonesia."The communications ministry said it was coordinating with Indonesia's National Police in case there was a need to take law enforcement action.National police spokesman Setyo Wasisto confirmed this.Indonesia had 69 million monthly active Facebook users as of the first quarter of 2014, ranking the country fourth globally after the United States, India and Brazil, company data showed.Indonesia threatened last year to block Facebook's WhatsApp Messenger, which is widely used in the country, unless obscene Graphics Interchange Format (GIF) images provided by third parties were removed.Facebook Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg said on Thursday that the social network had not seen any meaningful impact on usage or ad sales in the wake of a data privacy scandal.($1 = 13,775.0000 rupiah)(Reporting by Cindy Silviana; Additional reporting by Kanupriya Kapoor; Writing by Ed Davies; Editing by Christopher Cushing)SAN FRANCISCO —  Facebook Inc said on Thursday it had begun "fact-checking" photos and videos to reduce the hoaxes and false news stories that have plagued the world's largest social media network.Facebook has for months faced an uproar among users whose complaints range from the spread of fake news to the use of the network to manipulate elections and the harvesting of 50 million people's Facebook data by the political consultancy Cambridge Analytica.Manipulated photos and videos are another growing problem on social media.The fact-checking began on Wednesday in France with assistance from the news organization AFP and will soon expand to more countries and partners, Tessa Lyons, a product manager at Facebook, said in a briefing with reporters.Lyons did not say what criteria Facebook or AFP would use to evaluate photos and videos, or how much a photo could be edited or doctored before it is ruled fake.The project is part of "efforts to fight false news around elections," she said.A representative for AFP could not immediately be reached for comment.Shares of Facebook closed up 4.4 percent at $159.79 on Thursday after a tumultuous two weeks. It remained down more than 13 percent from March 16, when Facebook disclosed the Cambridge Analytica data leak and sparked fears of stricter regulation.Facebook has tried other ways to stem the spread of fake news. It has used third-party fact-checkers to identify them, and then given such stories less prominence in the Facebook News Feed when people share links to them.In January, Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said Facebook would prioritize "trustworthy" news by using member surveys to identify high-quality outlets.Samidh Chakrabarti, another Facebook product manager, said in the briefing that the company had begun to "proactively" look for election-related disinformation rather than waiting for reports from users, helping it to move more quickly.Alex Stamos, Facebook's chief security officer, said in the briefing that the company was concerned not only about false facts but also other kinds of fakery.He said Facebook wanted to reduce "fake audiences," which he described as using "tricks" to artificially expand the perception of support for a particular message, as well as "false narratives," such as headlines and language that "exploit disagreements."(Reporting by David Ingram; Editing by Richard Chang)NEW YORK —  Facebook's acknowledgement that most of its 2.2 billion members have probably had their personal data scraped by "malicious actors" is the latest example of the social network's failure to protect its users' data.Not to mention its apparent inability to even identify the problem until the company was already embroiled in scandal.CEO Mark Zuckerberg told reporters Wednesday that Facebook is shutting down a feature that let people search for Facebook users by phone number or email address. Although that was useful for people who wanted to find others on Facebook, it turns out that unscrupulous types also figured out years ago that they could use it to identify individuals and collect data off their profiles.The scrapers were at it long enough, Zuckerberg said, that "at some point during the last several years, someone has probably accessed your public information in this way."The only way to be safe would have been for users to deliberately turn off that search feature several years ago. Facebook had it turned on by default."I think Facebook has not been clear enough with how to use its privacy settings," said Jamie Winterton, director of strategy for Arizona State University's Global Security Initiative. "That, to me, was the failure."The breach was a stunning admission for a company already reeling from allegations that the political data-mining firm Cambridge Analytica inappropriately accessed data on as many as 87 million Facebook users to influence elections.Over the past few weeks, the scandal has mushroomed into investigations across continents, including a probe by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission. Zuckerberg himself will be questioned by Congress for the first time on Tuesday."The FTC looked the other way for years when consumer groups told them Facebook was violating its 2011 deal to better protect its users. But now the Cambridge Analytica scandal has awoken the FTC from its long digital privacy slumber," said Jeffrey Chester, executive director for the Washington-based privacy nonprofit Center for Digital Democracy.Neither Zuckerberg nor his company has identified those who carried out the data scraping. Outside experts believe they could have been identity thieves, scam artists or shady data brokers assembling marketing profiles.Zuckerberg said the company detected the problem in a data-privacy audit started after the Cambridge Analytica disclosures, but didn't say why the company hadn't noticed it — or fixed it — earlier.Facebook did not immediately respond to a request for comment Thursday on when it discovered the data scraping.In his call with reporters Wednesday, Zuckerberg said the company had tried "rate limiting" the searches. This restricted how many searches someone can conduct at one time from a particular IP address, a numeric designation that identifies a device's location on the internet. But Zuckerberg said the scrapers circumvented that defense by cycling through multiple IP addresses.The scraped information was limited to what a user had already chosen to make public — which, depending on a person's privacy settings, could be a lot — as well as what Facebook requires people to share. That includes full name, profile picture and listings of school or workplace networks.But hackers and scam artists could then use that information — and combine it with other data in circulation — to pull hoaxes on people, plant malware on their computers or commit other mischief.Having access to such a massive amount of data could also pose national security risks, Winterton said.A foreign entity could conceivably use such information to influence elections or stir up discord — exactly what Russia is alleged to have done, using Facebook and other social media, in the 2016 presidential elections.Privacy advocates have long been critical of Facebook's penchant for pushing people to share more and more information, often through pro-sharing default options.While the company offers detailed privacy controls — users can turn off ad targeting, for example, or face recognition, and post updates that no one else sees — many people never change their settings, and often don't even know how to.The company has tried to simplify its settings multiple times over the years, most recently this week.Winterton said that for individual Facebook users, worrying about this data scraping won't do much good — after all, the data is already out there. But she said it might be a good time to "reflect on what we are sharing and how we are sharing it and whether we need to.""Just because someone asks us information, it doesn't mean we have to give it to them if we are not comfortable," she said.She added that while she no longer has a Facebook account, when she did she put her birth year as 1912 and her hometown as Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Neither is true.__AP Technology Writer Anick Jesdanun contributed to this story.(Reuters) - Shares of Facebook Inc rose as much as 4.2 percent on Thursday after Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg said the social network had not seen any meaningful impact on usage or ad sales in the wake of a data privacy scandal.The company's shares have sunk 16 percent, wiping more than $80 billion from its market value since March 16, when the New York Times and London's Observer newspaper broke news of the use of its data by political consultancy Cambridge Analytica.Some investors see the chaos as a chance to snap up shares in a service for which there is scarce alternative, despite rising public scrutiny and the prospect of a grilling from U.S. legislators when Zuckerberg testifies before Congress next week.Canada's province of British Columbia and Canada's federal government combined investigations on Thursday, saying they had launched a joint probe into Facebook and Canadian data firm AggregateIQ, while Australian authorities said they were exploring whether the social media company had breached user privacy laws.The California State Teachers' Retirement System, with nearly $1 billion in Facebook stock as of last year, on Thursday also said it would question the company about privacy protections.Despite the probes and celebrities including singer Cher, actor Will Ferrell and Tesla Chief Elon Musk deleting their accounts, Facebook's social app downloads improved on a monthly basis both in the United States and globally, according to Evercore ISI.Facebook expanded its share of social app downloads in March by 33.2 percent from 30.1 percent, Evercore data showed.Several Wall Street analysts said the stock's decline presented a good opportunity to buy into the social network's previously high-flying shares, although they cautioned that much will depend on Zuckerberg's testimony to Congress."We suspect that looking back a year from now, if not sooner, this episode will have been a uniquely compelling buying opportunity in the mega-cap internet space," Deutsche Bank analysts said.Facebook's chief operating officer, Sheryl Sandberg, told Bloomberg in an interview on Thursday that a few advertisers had paused spending in the wake of the incident, but that the company was having reassuring conversations about how it has built privacy into its system. (https://bloom.bg/2q89KMt)Companies including U.S. auto parts retailer Pep Boys, internet company Mozilla and German bank Commerzbank AG have suspended advertisement on the platform.Sandberg also said a tool that allowed a researcher to gain access to personal information of up to 87 million users, complied with a privacy agreement the company signed with the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) in 2011.Her comments followed reports that the FTC was investigating the company over a possible violation of that agreement, which demands it to get user consent before sharing their information."While it's clear that investor sentiment has been materially impacted by (the) Cambridge Analytica revelations, we believe FB is acting proactively and aggressively to tighten its privacy controls and increase the level of transparency into its practices," Wells Fargo analyst Ken Sena said.Zuckerberg, who will testify about the scandal next week in front of committees in the U.S. House and Senate, may face calls from legislators for more oversight.Sandberg, in a separate interview with PBS, said: "We're not just open to regulations, we're moving ahead of it," and had built a tool which would be live before the next U.S. election and which would show details of who paid for election ads and demographics of the audience.Facebook shares closed up 2.7 percent at $159.35.(Reporting by Supantha Mukherjee, Sonam Rai and Arjun Panchadar in Bengaluru; Mohammad Zargham in Washington; editing by Peter Henderson, Bernard Orr and James Dalgleish)___Workers benefit as US businesses struggle to fill jobsWASHINGTON (AP) — More American employers are struggling to find enough workers to fill jobs, which might have contributed to slower hiring last month. And workers are benefiting in the meantime: More people who had given up looking for work are renewing their job hunts, more employees are confident enough to quit to look for other jobs and pay is gradually picking up. U.S. employers added just 103,000 jobs in March, the Labor Department said Friday, the fewest in six months.___Powell says Fed expects to stick with gradual rate hikesCHICAGO (AP) — Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell on Friday painted a mostly sunny view of the U.S. economy and said the Fed remains committed to raising its key interest rate gradually unless events change. He said it was too soon to determine how a trade fight with China could affect the U.S. economy.___Stocks dive as US proposes more China tariffs; Dow falls 572NEW YORK (AP) — Stocks ended the week the way they began it: tumbling as investors worry that tariffs and harsh words between the U.S. and China will touch off a trade war that derails the global economy. That came with the U.S. considering duties on an additional $100 billion in goods imported from China.___China vows to 'counterattack' US as trade spat worsensWASHINGTON (AP) — China vows to 'counterattack with great strength' if President Donald Trump hikes tariffs on an additional $100 billion in tariffs on Chinese goods in an escalating trade dispute between the world's two largest economies. Trump's surprise directive for the U.S. trade representative to consider more tariffs came a day after Beijing announced planned increases in duties on U.S. soybeans, aircraft and other items in response to American tariffs on $50 billion in Chinese imports.___Did Cambridge Analytica get your data? You'll know soonNEW YORK (AP) — Facebook will begin alerting users whose private data may have been compromised in the Cambridge Analytica scandal starting Monday. All 2.2 billion Facebook users will receive a notice with a link to information on which Facebook apps they use and what information they have shared with those apps. In addition, 87 million users whose data might have been shared with Cambridge Analytica will get a more detailed message informing them of that fact.___Nine West files for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protectionNEW YORK (AP) — Nine West Holdings Inc. has become the latest retailer to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in an attempt to restructure its debt. The shoe chain says the move was made to help with the sale of its Nine West and Bandolino footwear and handbag business and so it can focus more on its profitable businesses, which include One Jeanswear Group, The Jewelry Group, the Kasper Group and Anne Klein.___Boss buzzing you after hours? NYC might let you say buzz offNEW YORK (AP) — Technology that offered the promise of freedom from the confines of an office has instead become a ball and chain in its own right, blurring the lines between work hours and well, any other hours. A New York City Council member wants to put a stop to that with a proposal that would bar employers from requiring employees to check and respond to non-emergency electronic communications sent outside of regular work hours.___US consumer debt rose a slight 3.3 percent in FebruaryWASHINGTON (AP) — US consumers increased their debt by just 3.3 percent in February, the weakest monthly change in nearly seven years despite an otherwise healthy economy. The Federal Reserve said Friday that consumer borrowing rose $10.6 billion in March to nearly $3.9 trillion. The gains have slowed sharply from a 10.3 percent jump in debt levels in November. February's increase was the smallest since August 2011, when consumer credit levels declined.___Foreign worker saves 7 lives as Hawaii fishing boat sinksHONOLULU (AP) — A federal contractor who was aboard the fishing vessel Princess Hawaii when it sank off the Big Island credits a Vietnamese crewman with saving his life. Khanh Huynh was acting as the de facto captain of the doomed fishing boat. The 28-year-old fisherman is one of hundreds of foreigners who work aboard American-owned fishing vessels in Hawaii. The workers lack visas and live on the boats for the duration of their contracts — often for years at a time.___The Standard & Poor's 500 lost 58.37 points, or 2.2 percent, to 2,604.47. The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 572.46 points, or 2.3 percent, to 23,932.76. The Nasdaq composite slid 161.44 points, or 2.3 percent, to 6,915.11. The Russell 2000 index of smaller-company stocks dipped 29.63 points, or 1.9 percent, to 1,513.30.Benchmark U.S. crude dropped $1.48, or 2.3 percent, to $62.06 a barrel in New York while Brent crude, used to price international oils, lost $1.22, or 1.8 percent, to $67.11 per barrel in London. In other energy trading, wholesale gasoline dipped 3 cents to $1.95 a gallon. Heating oil lost 2 cents to $1.96 a gallon. Natural gas rose 3 cents to $2.70 per 1,000 cubic feet.NAIROBI/LAGOS —  In Kenya, which has a large and fast growing population of internet users, there are no specific laws or regulations to protect the privacy of those individuals.Kenya is not alone in Africa, which as a region has clocked the world's fastest growth in internet use over the past decade. Unlike in Europe and the United States, where data-privacy laws provide a level of protection to consumers, many Africans have little or no recourse if a data breach occurs because often legal and regulatory safeguards don't exist.Recent revelations about British analytics firm Cambridge Analytica, which Facebook says improperly accessed personal data of about 50 million of the social networks users in the 2016 U.S. presidential election, have also touched the African continent.Cambridge Analytica or its parent company SCL Group worked on the 2013 and 2017 campaigns of Kenya’s President Uhuru Kenyatta. The company was also hired to support the failed re-election bid of then-president Goodluck Jonathan of Nigeria in 2015, according to Britain’s Guardian newspaper.A spokesman for the Nigerian president said on Monday that the country's government will investigate allegations of improper involvement by Cambridge Analytica in the 2007 and 2015 elections.Kenya’s ruling Jubilee party told Reuters that it had hired SCL for “branding” in the 2017 presidential election but did not elaborate on the precise nature of the work.Cambridge Analytica didn't respond to a request for comment. The company has suspended its chief executive pending what it said would be a full, independent investigation.LIMITED PROTECTIONGrowth of internet use in Africa, a continent of 1 billion people, has been fueled by rapidly expanding mobile broadband networks and ever more affordable phones.That presents a major growth opportunity for internet companies such as Facebook, which currently sees some 123 million people across sub-Saharan Africa accessing its social network platform monthly.While some governments on the continent have responded to these rapid changes - rights campaigners welcomed a data-protection law passed by South Africa 2013 - many have not.Privacy advocacy groups say that is leaving a lot of Africans, many of whom are accessing the internet for the first time, with little or no protection.More than half of Africa's 54 countries have no data protection or privacy laws, according to London-based rights group Article 19. And, of the 14 countries that do, nine have no regulators to enforce them, the group says.In Kenya, a country of 44 million people with some 8.5 million using Facebook on a monthly basis, specialists say no specific data-protection laws exist. The government has said it is drafting a data protection bill.But even some data-privacy bills that have been introduced in African parliaments have been held up for years.In Nigeria, the African country with the most internet users, a data-protection bill that was introduced in 2010 is still making its way through parliament.The proposed Nigerian legislation, which is being reviewed by the upper house of parliament, would prohibit the processing of data for purposes other than their original intended use and companies could be fined for breaches of personal information.But digital-rights campaigners question whether law enforcement agencies and the judiciary would be equipped to enforce the Nigerian legislation if it was passed. A spokesman for Nigeria’s communications ministry declined to comment.Data privacy groups say that many African governments have a vested interest in not introducing such laws because they use citizens’ data for their own ends – whether for political campaigns, as in Kenya, or for suppressing political dissent, as rights groups allege that the government in Tanzania has done since passing a cyber crime law in 2015.A spokesman for the Tanzanian government said that authorities issued new regulations last month that, among other things, prevent the national communications regulator from disclosing personal data of web users.PERSONAL DATAPrivacy advocates say another issue impacting data protection in Africa is that some companies, including Facebook, have introduced stripped-down versions of their own platforms and some other websites for no fee in exchange for users providing some data.From users of its Free Basics service, Facebook collects certain information such as when the service was accessed, what type of device they are using and the mobile operator used, according to the company's website. "We may also share such usage information with the providers of third-party services," Facebook said.Privacy advocacy groups say some Free Basics users, who may be getting online for the first time, may have little or no understanding of what information is being collected from them.Facebook, which says its Free Basics service is available in 27 African countries, said users can "choose to delete their information associated with their use of Free Basics, and may do so by contacting us."Though some Africans access the internet via a no-fee service like Facebook’s Free Basics, many of those who have the ability to pay for mobile phone data still use the platform more than any other site on the internet, said Nanjira Sambuli, who heads the World Wide Web Foundation’s office in Kenya.   "Facebook is the Internet for many people in Africa," Sambuli said.While specialists say public awareness about the importance of data protection in Africa is far less than in the United States and Europe, there are signs of growing concern.Phumzile van Damme, a South African politician from the opposition Democratic Alliance, has raised concerns about what she termed the "digital dark arts" being used to manipulate voters ahead of the country's elections scheduled for next year.Writing on Twitter on March 25, van Damme said she had been studying the lessons of the 2016 U.S. election and reading reports of the involvement of private firms including Cambridge Analytica in "manipulating" voters using their data in recent African elections.She said that she hoped South Africa's communications regulator had been doing the same."Regulation always lags behind technological developments," she said.For some, concerns about the amount of personal information Facebook collects are weighed against the access to others that the social network provides."Is it time to say goodbye to Facebook?" asked the headline of a column published last month by The Standard, a Kenyan daily. The columnist wrote that his concern over Facebook holding the “power” of its users’ data – from what a user does on the platform to his or her activities on linked apps and other sites - had led him to leave Facebook repeatedly over the last two years.But, he added: "My leaving has however never lasted more than a day."(Reporting by Maggie Fick and Alexis Akwagyiram; Additional reporting by Ed Cropley in Johannesburg, John Ndiso in Nairobi, Fumbuka Ng'wanakilala in Dar es Salaam; and Eric Auchard and Paul Sandle in London; Writing by Maggie Fick; Editing by Cassell Bryan-Low)(Reuters) - Shares of Facebook Inc rose as much as 4.2 percent on Thursday after Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg said the social network had not seen any meaningful impact on usage or ad sales in the wake of a data privacy scandal.The company's shares have sunk 16 percent, wiping more than $80 billion from its market value since March 16, when the New York Times and London's Observer newspaper broke news of the use of its data by political consultancy Cambridge Analytica.Some investors see the chaos as a chance to snap up shares in a service for which there is scarce alternative, despite rising public scrutiny and the prospect of a grilling from U.S. legislators when Zuckerberg testifies before Congress next week.Canada's province of British Columbia and Canada's federal government combined investigations on Thursday, saying they had launched a joint probe into Facebook and Canadian data firm AggregateIQ, while Australian authorities said they were exploring whether the social media company had breached user privacy laws.The California State Teachers' Retirement System, with nearly $1 billion in Facebook stock as of last year, on Thursday also said it would question the company about privacy protections.Despite the probes and celebrities including singer Cher, actor Will Ferrell and Tesla Chief Elon Musk deleting their accounts, Facebook's social app downloads improved on a monthly basis both in the United States and globally, according to Evercore ISI.Facebook expanded its share of social app downloads in March by 33.2 percent from 30.1 percent, Evercore data showed.Several Wall Street analysts said the stock's decline presented a good opportunity to buy into the social network's previously high-flying shares, although they cautioned that much will depend on Zuckerberg's testimony to Congress."We suspect that looking back a year from now, if not sooner, this episode will have been a uniquely compelling buying opportunity in the mega-cap internet space," Deutsche Bank analysts said.Facebook's chief operating officer, Sheryl Sandberg, told Bloomberg in an interview on Thursday that a few advertisers had paused spending in the wake of the incident, but that the company was having reassuring conversations about how it has built privacy into its system. (https://bloom.bg/2q89KMt)Companies including U.S. auto parts retailer Pep Boys, internet company Mozilla and German bank Commerzbank AG have suspended advertisement on the platform.Sandberg also said a tool that allowed a researcher to gain access to personal information of up to 87 million users, complied with a privacy agreement the company signed with the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) in 2011.Her comments followed reports that the FTC was investigating the company over a possible violation of that agreement, which demands it to get user consent before sharing their information."While it's clear that investor sentiment has been materially impacted by (the) Cambridge Analytica revelations, we believe FB is acting proactively and aggressively to tighten its privacy controls and increase the level of transparency into its practices," Wells Fargo analyst Ken Sena said.Zuckerberg, who will testify about the scandal next week in front of committees in the U.S. House and Senate, may face calls from legislators for more oversight.Sandberg, in a separate interview with PBS, said: "We're not just open to regulations, we're moving ahead of it," and had built a tool which would be live before the next U.S. election and which would show details of who paid for election ads and demographics of the audience.Facebook shares closed up 2.7 percent at $159.35.(Reporting by Supantha Mukherjee, Sonam Rai and Arjun Panchadar in Bengaluru; Mohammad Zargham in Washington; editing by Peter Henderson, Bernard Orr and James Dalgleish)(Reuters) - Facebook Inc said on Wednesday it would end its partnerships with several large data brokers who help advertisers target people on the social network, a step that follows a scandal over how Facebook handles personal information.The world's largest social media company is under pressure to improve its handling of data after disclosing that information about 50 million Facebook users wrongly ended up in the hands of political consultancy Cambridge Analytica.Facebook adjusted the privacy settings on its service on Wednesday, giving users control over their personal information in fewer taps.Facebook has for years given advertisers the option of targeting their ads based on data collected by companies such as Acxiom Corp and Experian PLC.The tool has been widely used among certain categories of advertisers - such as automakers, luxury goods producers and consumer packaged goods companies - who do not sell directly to consumers and have relatively little information about who their customers are, according to Facebook."While this is common industry practice, we believe this step, winding down over the next six months, will help improve people's privacy on Facebook," Graham Mudd, a Facebook product marketing director, said in a statement.Shares in Acxiom traded down more than 10 percent to $25 after Facebook's announcement after the bell. Shares in other data brokers were largely unchanged. A representative for Acxiom could not immediately be reached for comment.Facebook declined to comment on how the change could affect its ad revenue.Advertisers would still be able to use third-party data services to measure how well their ads performed by examining purchasing data, Facebook said.Facebook's website lists nine third-party data providers that it has worked with, including Acxiom, Experian, Oracle Data Cloud, TransUnion and WPP PLC.None of the companies could immediately be reached for comment.Facebook on Wednesday also put all its privacy settings on one page and made it easier to stop third-party apps from using personal information. Privacy settings had previously been spread over at least 20 screens, Facebook said.Facebook said in a blog post it had been working on the updates for some time but sped things up to appease users' anger over how the company uses data and as lawmakers around the globe call for regulation.Facebook's shares closed up 0.5 percent at $153.03 on Wednesday. They are still down more than 17 percent since March 16, when Facebook first acknowledged that user data had been improperly channeled in 2014 via a third-party app to Cambridge Analytica, which was later hired by Donald Trump's 2016 presidential campaign.The data leak has raised investor concerns that any failure by big tech companies to protect privacy could deter advertisers, who are Facebook's lifeblood, and lead to tougher regulation.SCRUTINY FROM LAWMAKERSFacebook Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg has repeatedly apologized for the mistakes the company made and has promised to crack down on abuse of the Facebook platform and restrict developers' access to user information.There is a new Facebook page - called Access Your Information - where users can see what they have shared and manage it."The biggest difference is ease of access in settings, which fulfills Mark Zuckerberg's promise to make the privacy process and permissions more transparent to users," Wedbush analyst Michael Pachter said.It was uncertain whether the changes will satisfy lawmakers.They were announced ahead of a stringent European Union data law which comes into force in May. It requires companies to give people a "right to portability" - to take their data with them - and imposes fines of up to 4 percent of global revenue for companies breaking the law.Lawmakers in the United States and Britain are still clamoring for Zuckerberg himself to explain how users' data ended up in the hands of Cambridge Analytica.He plans to testify before Congress, a source briefed on the matter said on Tuesday. Facebook has said it has received invitations to testify and that it is talking to legislators.Zuckerberg and the CEOs of Alphabet Inc and Twitter Inc have been invited to testify at an April 10 hearing on data privacy. The U.S. House Energy and Commerce Committee and U.S. Senate Commerce Committee have also asked Zuckerberg to appear at a hearing.The U.S. Federal Trade Commission has opened an investigation into Facebook, and attorneys representing 37 states are also pressing Zuckerberg to explain what happened.(Reporting by David Ingram and Julia Fioretti; Additional reporting by Laharee Chatterjee and Arjun Panchadar; Editing by James Dalgleish and Cynthia Osterman)WASHINGTON —  Facebook isn't just a company. It's a behemoth, with 2.1 billion monthly users, $40 billion in revenue and more than 25,000 employees worldwide.And that leaves Washington with a daunting task: How do you tame a corporate giant? Or do you even try?"It's tricky and it's going to be hard, but there are ways it can be dealt with," says Virginia Sen. Mark Warner, a former tech executive who has led investigations into Russian interference on social media over the last year as the top Democrat on the Intelligence Committee. "The idea that we're going to keep the wild, wild West — I don't think it's sustainable."The picture will begin to come into focus next week. Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg is scheduled to testify April 10 and 11 before Senate and House committees as his company grapples with the privacy scandal involving Cambridge Analytica, a political consulting firm linked to President Donald Trump.Facebook's reckoning in Washington comes on multiple fronts. Russia's use of the platform to meddle in U.S. elections, a regulatory investigation that could result in fines of hundreds of millions of dollars against the company for privacy violations, and the Cambridge Analytica episode are all topmost concerns.But in the capital's pro-business, anti-regulatory climate, it's questionable whether the Republican-led Congress or Trump regulators have the appetite to rein it in.Facebook is spending millions on lobbying to try to ward off regulations, even seeking to narrow a Senate bill that lawmakers call "the lightest touch possible." It would require more transparency in online political ads, something Facebook says it is providing on its own.But the stakes grew Wednesday when Facebook revealed that information belonging to as many as 87 million of its users may have been improperly shared with Cambridge Analytica, which gathered the data with the intent of swaying elections. That number was far higher than originally known.Congress' response to the myriad issues dogging Facebook could depend on Zuckerberg himself. He has apologized for a "major breach of trust" in the Cambridge Analytica episode and Facebook has announced it would stop working with third-party data collectors.Privacy advocates and legal experts say that's not enough."It strikes me as a company that is trying to weather a PR storm and then get back to business as usual and hoping their users forget this ever happened," said Nate Cardozo, a senior staff attorney for Electronic Frontier Foundation, a privacy group based in San Francisco.Facebook and other social media companies have faced bipartisan criticism over both privacy issues and the Russian intervention. But Trump and his pro-business GOP allies on Capitol Hill have made rolling back Obama-era regulations a priority, which makes any new federal rules for protecting data and privacy unlikely in the immediate future.Republicans last year struck down online privacy regulations issued during President Barack Obama's final months in office that would have given consumers more control over how companies like Comcast, AT&T and Verizon share information. Critics complained that the rule would have increased costs, stifled innovation and picked winners and losers among internet companies.And Congress elected to do nothing after Equifax disclosed in September that hackers exploited a software flaw that the credit monitoring company failed to fix, exposing Social Security numbers, birthdates and other personal data belonging to nearly 148 million Americans.Lawmakers have yet to come up with a fix for the patchwork of conflicting state laws that govern how companies shield personal data and notify consumers when breaches occur. Mike Litt, consumer campaign director at U.S. PIRG, a public interest group, said Congress instead is considering legislation that would exempt credit bureaus from data break notifications and make it harder for states to hold them accountable."After the Equifax data breach, we saw Congress talk a good game but fail to follow through on helping consumers," Litt said. "To prevent Congress from letting Facebook off the hook, outraged Americans need to keep up the heat."To defend its interests in Washington, Facebook has filled its executive ranks with former senior government officials from both political parties. Nathaniel Gleicher, its director of cybersecurity policy, was in charge of cybersecurity policy at the National Security Council during the Obama administration. Joel Kaplan, Facebook's vice president for global public policy, served as a senior aide to President George W. Bush.The company spent just over $13 million on lobbying in 2017, according to disclosure records filed with Congress. One of the lobbying team's newer members, Sandra Luff, was Attorney General Jeff Sessions' national security adviser when he served in the Senate.Zuckerberg suggested during a CNN interview last month that he's open to regulation. But he quickly qualified that commitment, saying he'd get behind the "right" kind of rules, such as the bill that requires online political ads to disclose who paid for them. But the company is seeking to weaken even that bill.Warner acknowledged that even minor regulation of Facebook and other technology companies will be difficult. But he's encouraging them to work with Washington now, before a "catastrophic event" that could shift the landscape or if Democrats win back seats in November's elections.He suggests several possibilities: requiring Facebook and other companies to disclose the country of origin of ads, creating a self-regulatory body, or even allowing users to move their data from one platform to another.More drastic measures could be to allow users to own their own data or to hold social media companies more responsible for what is posted on their platforms.In Europe, Facebook and other tech giants like Google are bracing for tough new data privacy rules that take effect May 25 and will apply to any company that collects data on EU residents, no matter where it is based. The rules will make it easier for consumers to give and withdraw consent for the use of their data.In the U.S., Facebook's biggest challenge may come from the Federal Trade Commission, which is investigating whether the company violated the terms of a 2011 settlement that made privacy assurances.Facebook agreed then to settle the commission's charges that it deceived users by assuring them their information would remain private, then repeatedly allowing it to be shared and made public. Each violation of the agreement could carry a penalty of up to $40,000, according to settlement terms, meaning potential fines in the hundreds of millions.Frank Pasquale, a University of Maryland law professor who's written extensively about how corporations use personal data, said the federal government's antitrust enforcers should be more vigilant with Facebook.Facebook has completed dozens of mergers and acquisitions since it was founded in 2004. Pasquale said the Obama administration failed to realize the significance of two of Facebook's largest purchases: the photo-sharing app Instagram for $1 billion in 2012 and WhatsApp two years later for nearly $22 billion."This is clearly a monopolistic company that is trying to eliminate even the smallest challenge to its domination of the social media market," he said.The privacy scandal has taken a heavy financial toll on Zuckerberg and Facebook. Forbes Magazine estimated that Zuckerberg's net worth dropped over the last month from $71 billion to $61.7 billion. Facebook's market value has fallen by more than $88 billion in less than three weeks since the scandal broke, from nearly $538 billion in mid-March to about $449.5 billion.___Associated Press writer Marley Jay in New York contributed to this report.(Reuters) - Facebook Inc said on Wednesday it would end its partnerships with several large data brokers who help advertisers target people on the social network, a step that follows a scandal over how Facebook handles personal information.The world's largest social media company is under pressure to improve its handling of data after disclosing that information about 50 million Facebook users wrongly ended up in the hands of political consultancy Cambridge Analytica.Facebook adjusted the privacy settings on its service on Wednesday, giving users control over their personal information in fewer taps.Facebook has for years given advertisers the option of targeting their ads based on data collected by companies such as Acxiom Corp and Experian PLC.The tool has been widely used among certain categories of advertisers - such as automakers, luxury goods producers and consumer packaged goods companies - who do not sell directly to consumers and have relatively little information about who their customers are, according to Facebook."While this is common industry practice, we believe this step, winding down over the next six months, will help improve people's privacy on Facebook," Graham Mudd, a Facebook product marketing director, said in a statement.Shares in Acxiom traded down more than 10 percent to $25 after Facebook's announcement after the bell. Shares in other data brokers were largely unchanged.Acxiom said late on Wednesday it did not expect this change to impact its revenue or earnings for the year ending in March.     The company currently expects revenue in the range of $910 million to $915 million in the 2018 fiscal year.However, for the 2019 fiscal year, Acxiom expects total revenue and profitability to be negatively impacted by as much as $25 million.Facebook declined to comment on how the change could affect its ad revenue.Advertisers would still be able to use third-party data services to measure how well their ads performed by examining purchasing data, Facebook said.Facebook's website lists nine third-party data providers that it has worked with, including Acxiom, Experian, Oracle Data Cloud, TransUnion and WPP PLC.Other companies, besides Acxiom, were not available for comment.Facebook on Wednesday also put all its privacy settings on one page and made it easier to stop third-party apps from using personal information. Privacy settings had previously been spread over at least 20 screens, Facebook said.Facebook said in a blog post it had been working on the updates for some time but sped things up to appease users' anger over how the company uses data and as lawmakers around the globe call for regulation.Facebook's shares closed up 0.5 percent at $153.03 on Wednesday. They are still down more than 17 percent since March 16, when Facebook first acknowledged that user data had been improperly channeled in 2014 via a third-party app to Cambridge Analytica, which was later hired by Donald Trump's 2016 presidential campaign.The data leak has raised investor concerns that any failure by big tech companies to protect privacy could deter advertisers, who are Facebook's lifeblood, and lead to tougher regulation.SCRUTINY FROM LAWMAKERSFacebook Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg has repeatedly apologized for the mistakes the company made and has promised to crack down on abuse of the Facebook platform and restrict developers' access to user information.There is a new Facebook page - called Access Your Information - where users can see what they have shared and manage it."The biggest difference is ease of access in settings, which fulfills Mark Zuckerberg's promise to make the privacy process and permissions more transparent to users," Wedbush analyst Michael Pachter said.It was uncertain whether the changes will satisfy lawmakers.They were announced ahead of a stringent European Union data law which comes into force in May. It requires companies to give people a "right to portability" - to take their data with them - and imposes fines of up to 4 percent of global revenue for companies breaking the law.Lawmakers in the United States and Britain are still clamoring for Zuckerberg himself to explain how users' data ended up in the hands of Cambridge Analytica.He plans to testify before Congress, a source briefed on the matter said on Tuesday. Facebook has said it has received invitations to testify and that it is talking to legislators.Zuckerberg and the CEOs of Alphabet Inc and Twitter Inc have been invited to testify at an April 10 hearing on data privacy. The U.S. House Energy and Commerce Committee and U.S. Senate Commerce Committee have also asked Zuckerberg to appear at a hearing.The U.S. Federal Trade Commission has opened an investigation into Facebook, and attorneys representing 37 states are also pressing Zuckerberg to explain what happened.(Reporting by David Ingram and Julia Fioretti; Additional reporting by Laharee Chatterjee, Arjun Panchadar and Ismail Shakil in Bengaluru; Editing by James Dalgleish and Cynthia Osterman)WASHINGTON —  Facebook isn't just a company. It's a behemoth, with 2.1 billion monthly users, $40 billion in revenue and more than 25,000 employees worldwide.And that leaves Washington with a daunting task: How do you tame a corporate giant? Or do you even try?"It's tricky and it's going to be hard, but there are ways it can be dealt with," says Virginia Sen. Mark Warner, a former tech executive who has led investigations into Russian interference on social media over the last year as the top Democrat on the Intelligence Committee. "The idea that we're going to keep the wild, wild West — I don't think it's sustainable."The picture will begin to come into focus next week. Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg is scheduled to testify April 10 and 11 before Senate and House committees as his company grapples with the privacy scandal involving Cambridge Analytica, a political consulting firm linked to President Donald Trump.Facebook's reckoning in Washington comes on multiple fronts. Russia's use of the platform to meddle in U.S. elections, a regulatory investigation that could result in fines of hundreds of millions of dollars against the company for privacy violations, and the Cambridge Analytica episode are all topmost concerns.But in the capital's pro-business, anti-regulatory climate, it's questionable whether the Republican-led Congress or Trump regulators have the appetite to rein it in.Facebook is spending millions on lobbying to try to ward off regulations, even seeking to narrow a Senate bill that lawmakers call "the lightest touch possible." It would require more transparency in online political ads, something Facebook says it is providing on its own.But the stakes grew Wednesday when Facebook revealed that information belonging to as many as 87 million of its users may have been improperly shared with Cambridge Analytica, which gathered the data with the intent of swaying elections. That number was far higher than originally known.Congress' response to the myriad issues dogging Facebook could depend on Zuckerberg himself. He has apologized for a "major breach of trust" in the Cambridge Analytica episode and Facebook has announced it would stop working with third-party data collectors.Privacy advocates and legal experts say that's not enough."It strikes me as a company that is trying to weather a PR storm and then get back to business as usual and hoping their users forget this ever happened," said Nate Cardozo, a senior staff attorney for Electronic Frontier Foundation, a privacy group based in San Francisco.Facebook and other social media companies have faced bipartisan criticism over both privacy issues and the Russian intervention. But Trump and his pro-business GOP allies on Capitol Hill have made rolling back Obama-era regulations a priority, which makes any new federal rules for protecting data and privacy unlikely in the immediate future.Republicans last year struck down online privacy regulations issued during President Barack Obama's final months in office that would have given consumers more control over how companies like Comcast, AT&T and Verizon share information. Critics complained that the rule would have increased costs, stifled innovation and picked winners and losers among internet companies.And Congress elected to do nothing after Equifax disclosed in September that hackers exploited a software flaw that the credit monitoring company failed to fix, exposing Social Security numbers, birthdates and other personal data belonging to nearly 148 million Americans.Lawmakers have yet to come up with a fix for the patchwork of conflicting state laws that govern how companies shield personal data and notify consumers when breaches occur. Mike Litt, consumer campaign director at U.S. PIRG, a public interest group, said Congress instead is considering legislation that would exempt credit bureaus from data break notifications and make it harder for states to hold them accountable."After the Equifax data breach, we saw Congress talk a good game but fail to follow through on helping consumers," Litt said. "To prevent Congress from letting Facebook off the hook, outraged Americans need to keep up the heat."To defend its interests in Washington, Facebook has filled its executive ranks with former senior government officials from both political parties. Nathaniel Gleicher, its director of cybersecurity policy, was in charge of cybersecurity policy at the National Security Council during the Obama administration. Joel Kaplan, Facebook's vice president for global public policy, served as a senior aide to President George W. Bush.The company spent just over $13 million on lobbying in 2017, according to disclosure records filed with Congress. One of the lobbying team's newer members, Sandra Luff, was Attorney General Jeff Sessions' national security adviser when he served in the Senate.Zuckerberg suggested during a CNN interview last month that he's open to regulation. But he quickly qualified that commitment, saying he'd get behind the "right" kind of rules, such as the bill that requires online political ads to disclose who paid for them. But the company is seeking to weaken even that bill.Warner acknowledged that even minor regulation of Facebook and other technology companies will be difficult. But he's encouraging them to work with Washington now, before a "catastrophic event" that could shift the landscape or if Democrats win back seats in November's elections.He suggests several possibilities: requiring Facebook and other companies to disclose the country of origin of ads, creating a self-regulatory body, or even allowing users to move their data from one platform to another.More drastic measures could be to allow users to own their own data or to hold social media companies more responsible for what is posted on their platforms.In Europe, Facebook and other tech giants like Google are bracing for tough new data privacy rules that take effect May 25 and will apply to any company that collects data on EU residents, no matter where it is based. The rules will make it easier for consumers to give and withdraw consent for the use of their data.In the U.S., Facebook's biggest challenge may come from the Federal Trade Commission, which is investigating whether the company violated the terms of a 2011 settlement that made privacy assurances.Facebook agreed then to settle the commission's charges that it deceived users by assuring them their information would remain private, then repeatedly allowing it to be shared and made public. Each violation of the agreement could carry a penalty of up to $40,000, according to settlement terms, meaning potential fines in the hundreds of millions.Frank Pasquale, a University of Maryland law professor who's written extensively about how corporations use personal data, said the federal government's antitrust enforcers should be more vigilant with Facebook.Facebook has completed dozens of mergers and acquisitions since it was founded in 2004. Pasquale said the Obama administration failed to realize the significance of two of Facebook's largest purchases: the photo-sharing app Instagram for $1 billion in 2012 and WhatsApp two years later for nearly $22 billion."This is clearly a monopolistic company that is trying to eliminate even the smallest challenge to its domination of the social media market," he said.The privacy scandal has taken a heavy financial toll on Zuckerberg and Facebook. Forbes Magazine estimated that Zuckerberg's net worth dropped over the last month from $71 billion to $61.7 billion. Facebook's market value has fallen by more than $88 billion in less than three weeks since the scandal broke, from nearly $538 billion in mid-March to about $449.5 billion.___Associated Press writer Marley Jay in New York contributed to this report.Facebook said it would roll out a centralized system for its users to control their privacy and security settings in response to an outcry over the way it has handled personal data.The system, which will be introduced to Facebook users globally over the coming weeks, will allow people to change their privacy and security settings from one place rather than having to go to roughly 20 separate sections across the social media platform.From the new page, users can control the personal information the social network keeps on them, such as their political preferences or interests, and download and review a file of data Facebook has collected about them. Facebook also will clarify what types of apps people are currently using and what permissions those apps have to gather their information.Facebook began developing the centralized system last year but sped it up after revelations that a British political consulting firm, Cambridge Analytica, improperly harvested the information of 50 million users of the social network. The amount of data Cambridge Analytica obtained about Facebook users reawakened fears over how much information the social network has gathered about people, leading to a #DeleteFacebook movement and other criticism.“The last week showed how much more work we need to do to enforce our policies, and to help people understand how Facebook works and the choices they have over their data,” Erin Egan, Facebook’s chief privacy officer, and Ashlie Beringer, a Facebook deputy general counsel, said in a statement announcing the new system. “We’ve heard loud and clear that privacy settings and other important tools are too hard to find, and that we must do more to keep people informed.”The Cambridge Analytica scandal has plunged Facebook into its worst crisis in years, with regulators and lawmakers in the United States and Britain demanding answers about how the social network deals with data privacy. Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, has agreed to appear in front of lawmakers on Capitol Hill next month, people familiar with the decision have said.Last week, Mr. Zuckerberg said in a statement that Facebook had to do better with user data and promised to roll out products that give users more control over their information and privacy settings.“One of our biggest responsibilities is to protect data,” he told The New York Times last week. “Whenever there’s an issue where someone’s data gets passed to someone who the rules of the system shouldn’t have allowed it to, that’s rightfully a big issue and deserves to be a big uproar.Late Wednesday, Facebook also said that it was halting its practice of allowing advertisers to target ads using information from third-party data brokers. These are business-to-business companies that can collect a vast range of details about individual consumers such as their shopping habits, health concerns, income range and preferred credit card.The social network had previously allowed advertisers to use consumer details from data brokers like Experian, Acxiom and Oracle’s Datalogix unit to help target ads to Facebook users. But Facebook said it was now mothballing that option, called “Partner Categories.””We want to let advertisers know that we will be shutting down Partner Categories,” Graham Mudd, a product marketing director at Facebook, said in a statement.“This product enables third-party data providers to offer their targeting directly on Facebook,” he added. “While this is common industry practice, we believe this step, winding down over the next six months, will help improve people’s privacy on Facebook.”In 2012, the Federal Trade Commission opened an inquiry into data brokers and subsequently recommended that Congress consider enacting a law “to make data broker practices more visible to consumers and to give consumers greater control over the immense amounts of personal information about them collected and shared by data brokers.”How much of a difference these actions may make to Facebook’s data privacy practices was unclear. Some privacy advocates noted, for instance, that the company’s new centralized privacy and security settings page has been tried in the past.“The platform made similar promises many times before,” said Zeynep Tufekci, an associate professor at the University of North Carolina who studies how technology affects society. She pointed out that in 2010, Mr. Zuckerberg said in The Washington Post that Facebook users needed simpler controls over their privacy and had promised then that Facebook would “add privacy controls that are much simpler to use.”Yet eight years later, the same concerns have resurfaced, Ms. Tufekci said.“The past decade shows that user concerns over privacy appear to have little teeth on changing how the platform behaves, aside from a recycling of contrite statements and promises to do better from its C.E.O.,” she said.NEW YORK —  The author of a provocative Facebook memo declaring that growth is justified even if it costs lives says he doesn't actually agree with the memo and wrote it to provoke debate.The 2016 internal memo, titled "The Ugly," was leaked to BuzzFeed this week. In it, Facebook executive Andrew Bosworth said "all the work we do in growth is justified," even if it costs people their lives because they are exposed to bullies or die in a terrorist attack coordinated through Facebook.Bosworth, who goes by "Boz," has been at Facebook since 2006 and serves as the company's vice president in charge of virtual- and augmented-reality efforts. Previously, he was vice president of ads and helped create Facebook features such as Messenger, its news feed and groups.Bosworth tweeted Thursday that the memo was one of the most unpopular things he's written internally, and "the ensuing debate helped shape our tools for the better."In a statement to BuzzFeed that Facebook confirmed, CEO Mark Zuckerberg called Bosworth a "talented leader who says many provocative things," but added the memo was something "that most people at Facebook including myself disagreed with strongly.""We've never believed the ends justify the means," Zuckerberg said in the statement. "We recognize that connecting people isn't enough by itself. We also need to work to bring people closer together. We changed our whole mission and company focus to reflect this last year."Facebook is grappling with an unprecedented crisis over allegations that Cambridge Analytica, a Trump-affiliated political consulting firm, obtained data of tens of millions of users without their permission with the intent of swaying elections. That followed a string of scandals, including revelations that Russia used its platform to meddle in U.S. elections.Facebook is facing new questions about its practice of collecting call and text histories from Android devices. The company has not provided details on why it needed this data or what it did with it, saying only that it was used to improve people's experience on Facebook. It's not clear how the data collection made Facebook users' experience better on Android devices when Facebook couldn't get the same data from iPhones.NEW YORK —  Facebook revealed Wednesday that tens of millions more people might have been exposed in the Cambridge Analytica privacy scandal than previously thought and said it will restrict the user data that outsiders can access.Those developments came as congressional officials said CEO Mark Zuckerberg will testify next week, while Facebook unveiled a new privacy policy that aims to explain the data it gathers on users more clearly — but doesn't actually change what it collects and shares.In a call with reporters Wednesday, Zuckerberg acknowledged he made a "huge mistake" in failing to take a broad enough view of what Facebook's responsibility is in the world. He said it isn't enough for Facebook to believe app developers when they say they follow the rules. He says Facebook has to ensure they do.Facebook is facing its worst privacy scandal in years following allegations that Cambridge Analytica, a Trump-affiliated data mining firm, used ill-gotten data from millions of users through an app to try to influence elections.Facebook said Wednesday that as many as 87 million people might have had their data accessed — an increase from the 50 million disclosed in published reports. Facebook is basing the estimate in part on the number of friends each user might have had. Cambridge Analytica said in a statement that it had data for only 30 million people.On Monday all Facebook users will receive a notice on their Facebook feeds with a link to see what apps they use and what information they have shared with those apps. They'll have a chance to delete apps they no longer want. Users who might have had their data shared with Cambridge Analytica will be told of that. Facebook says most of the affected users are in the U.S.Zuckerberg said fixing the company's problems will take years.Besides the privacy scandal, Facebook also has been dealing with fake news, the use of Facebook to spread hate and discord and concerns about social media's effect on people's mental well-being.These are "big issues" and a big shift for Facebook as it broadens its responsibility, Zuckerberg said. He added that he does think that by the end of this year the company will have "turned a corner" on a lot of the issues. Zuckerberg has made fixing the company his personal challenge for 2018.As part of the steps it's taking to address scrutiny about outsiders' access to user data, Facebook outlined several changes to further tighten its policies. For one, it is restricting access that apps can have to data about users' events, as well as information about groups such as member lists and content.In addition, the company is also removing the option to search for users by entering a phone number or an email address. While this helped individuals find friends, Facebook says businesses that had phone or email information on customers were able to collect profile information this way. Facebook says it believes most of its 2.2 billion users had their public profile information scraped by businesses or various malicious actors through this technique at some point. Posts and other content set to be visible only to friends weren't collected.This comes on top of changes announced a few weeks ago. For example, Facebook has said it will remove developers' access to people's data if the person has not used the app in three months.Earlier Wednesday, Facebook unveiled a new privacy policy that seeks to clarify its data collection and use.Although Facebook says the policy changes aren't prompted by recent events or tighter privacy rules coming from the EU, it's an opportune time. Zuckerberg is set to testify April 10 before a joint hearing of the Senate Commerce and Judiciary Committees, and a day later before the House Energy and Commerce Committee . The two sessions will be his first testimony before Congress. Separately, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission and various authorities in Europe are investigating.As Facebook evolved from a closed, Harvard-only network with no ads to a giant corporation with $40 billion in advertising revenue and huge subsidiaries like Instagram and WhatsApp, its privacy policy has also shifted — over and over.Almost always, critics say, the changes meant a move away from protecting user privacy toward pushing openness and more sharing. On the other hand, regulatory and user pressure has sometimes led Facebook to pull back on its data collection and use and to explain things in plainer language — in contrast to dense legalese from many other internet companies.The policy changes come a week after Facebook gave its privacy settings a makeover. The company tried to make it easier to navigate its complex and often confusing privacy and security settings, though the makeover didn't change what Facebook collects and shares either.Facebook's new privacy policy has a new section explaining that it collects people's contact information if they choose to "upload, sync or import" this to the service. This may include users' address books on their phones, as well as their call logs and text histories. The new policy says Facebook may use this data to help "you and others find people you may know."Several users were surprised to learn recently that Facebook had been collecting information about whom they texted or called and for how long, though not the actual contents of text messages. It seemed to have been done without explicit consent, though Facebook says it collected such data only from Android users who specifically allowed it to do so — for instance, by agreeing to permissions when installing Facebook.On Wednesday, Facebook said will delete all logs after a year and in the future, the only information this tool will collect from now on is the data that it needs to operate and "not broader data such as the time of calls."The new policy also makes it clear that WhatsApp and Instagram are part of Facebook and that the companies share information about users. WhatsApp will still have a separate policy as well, while Facebook and Instagram share one.___This story has been corrected to reflect that WhatsApp has its own privacy policy, while Facebook and Instagram share the same one.NEW YORK —  Some 60 companies including such leading brands as Subway, Sprint and the NFL are joining forces to help each other follow you around online.Adobe, a company better known for Photoshop and PDF files, says the new Device Co-op initiative it is organizing will help companies offer more personalized experiences and make ads less annoying by filtering out products and services you have already bought or will never buy. Under the initiative, Adobe can tell you're the same person on a home PC, a work laptop, a phone and a tablet by analyzing past sign-ins with member companies.The initiative comes amid heightened privacy sensitivities after reports that Facebook allowed a political consulting firm, Cambridge Analytica, to harvest data on millions of Facebook users to influence elections. Facebook also has been criticized for collecting call and text logs from phones running Google's Android system.Adobe's initiative underscores the role data plays in helping companies make money. Many of the initial uses are for better ad targeting.The company timed Wednesday's announcement to a digital marketing conference it is hosting this week in Las Vegas. Adobe executives said they believed their initiative offers strong privacy safeguards and weren't worried about a backlash in light of the Facebook scandal."With this stuff coming out now around Cambridge Analytica and Facebook, the bar has to be so high in terms of privacy," Adobe executive Amit Ahuja said.Adobe says no personal data is being exchanged among participating companies, which also include Allstate, Lenovo, Intel, Barnes & Noble, Subaru and the Food Network. Adobe says the program links about 300 million consumers across nearly 2 billion devices in the U.S. and Canada.The program would let Sprint, for instance, know that Bob is already a customer when he visits from a new device. Bob wouldn't get a promotion to switch from another carrier, but might get instead a phone upgrade offer. Or if Mary has declared herself a Giants fan on the NFL's app, she might see ads with Giants banners when visiting NFL.com from a laptop for the first time.All this might feel creepy, but such cross-device tracking is already commonly done by matching attributes such as devices that from the same internet location, or IP address. Consumers typically have little control over it.Adobe says it will give consumers a chance to opt out of such tracking. And it's breaking industry practices in a few ways. Adobe says it will honor opt-out requests for all participating companies and for all devices at once. It's more typical for such setups to require people do so one by one. All companies in the initiative are listed on Adobe's website, a break from some companies' practice of referring only to unspecified partners."We're doing everything we can not letting brands hide themselves," Ahuja said.But in taking an opt-out approach, which is common in the industry, Adobe assumes that users consent. And it places the burden on consumers to learn about this initiative and to figure out how they can opt out of it.(Reuters) - A U.S. judge has ordered Facebook Inc to let her review documents it has refused to give the Internal Revenue Service as that agency probes whether the social media company used an Irish unit to slash billions of dollars from its tax bill.In an order on Tuesday night, U.S. Magistrate Judge Laurel Beeler in San Francisco said she may review up to 15 of the 153 disputed documents, which Facebook believes are privileged or otherwise confidential. The government may select the documents for her to review.According to the government, most of the documents concern a decision by Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg and other Facebook executives to set up an international headquarters in Dublin, Ireland, which occurred in 2010, and the transfer of assets such as worldwide user bases and online platforms there.Facebook was warned by the IRS in July 2016 that the probe could boost its U.S. tax bill by $3 billion to $5 billion, plus interest and penalties, for tax years beginning in 2010. It said last month it has set aside adequate amounts for the probe.The Menlo Park, California-based company declined to comment on Wednesday.Beeler issued her order amid an unrelated worldwide outcry over Facebook's privacy practices, including the harvesting of user data by the London-based Cambridge Analytica research firm that worked on Donald Trump's 2016 U.S. presidential campaign.Facebook said on Dec. 12 it would stop booking international revenue in Ireland, and instead have local affiliates book such revenue in countries where it was generated.In making that change, which it expected to complete by the first half of 2019, Facebook cited a desire to "provide more transparency to governments and policy makers around the world."The company in 2016 routed 12.6 billion euros (US$15.5 billion) of revenue through Ireland but paid just 30 million euros (US$37 million) of taxes there, published reports said.The case is U.S. v Facebook Inc et al, U.S. District Court, Northern District of California, No. 16-03777.(Reporting by Jonathan Stempel in New York; Editing by Tom Brown)SAN FRANCISCO —  Facebook Inc Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said on Tuesday that he agreed "in spirit" with a strict new European Union law on data privacy but stopped short of committing to it as the standard for the social network across the world.As Facebook reels from a scandal over the mishandling of personal information belonging to millions of users, the company is facing demands to improve privacy and learn lessons from the landmark EU law scheduled to take effect next month.Zuckerberg told Reuters in a phone interview that Facebook was working on a version of the law that would work globally, bringing some European privacy guarantees worldwide, but the 33-year-old billionaire demurred when asked what parts of the law he would not extend worldwide."We're still nailing down details on this, but it should directionally be, in spirit, the whole thing," Zuckerberg said. He did not elaborate.His comments signal that U.S. Facebook users, many of them still angry over the company's admission that political consultancy Cambridge Analytica got hold of Facebook data on 50 million members, could find themselves in a worse position than Europeans.The European law, called the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), is the biggest overhaul of online privacy since the birth of the internet, giving Europeans the right to know what data is stored on them and the right to have it deleted.Apple Inc and some other tech firms have said they do plan to give people in the United States and elsewhere the same protections and rights that Europeans will gain.Shares of Facebook closed up 0.5 percent on Tuesday at $156.11. They are down more than 15 percent since March 16, when the scandal broke over Cambridge Analytica.PUSH FOR DATA PRIVACYPrivacy advocacy groups have been urging Facebook and its Silicon Valley competitors such as Alphabet Inc's Google to apply EU data laws worldwide, largely without success."We want Facebook and Google and all the other companies to immediately adopt in the United States and worldwide any new protections that they implement in Europe," said Jeff Chester, executive director of the Center for Digital Democracy, in Washington.Zuckerberg said many of the tools that are part of the law, such as the ability of users to delete all their data, are already available for people on Facebook."We think that this is a good opportunity to take that moment across the rest of the world," he said. "The vast majority of what is required here are things that we've already had for years across the world for everyone."Google and Facebook are the global leaders in internet ad revenue. Both based in California, they possess enormous amounts of data on billions of people.Google has declined to comment on its plans.When GDPR takes effect on May 25, people in EU countries will gain the right to transfer their data to other social networks, for example. Facebook and its competitors will also need to be much more specific about how they plan to use people's data, and they will need to get explicit consent.GDPR is likely to hurt profit at Facebook because it could reduce the value of ads if the company cannot use personal information as freely and the added expense of hiring lawyers to ensure compliance with the new law.Data is central to Facebook's advertising business, and it has not yet sketched out a satisfying plan for how it plans to comply, said Pivotal Research analyst Brian Wieser."I haven't heard any solutions from Facebook to get ahead of the problem yet," Wieser said.Failure to comply with the law carries a maximum penalty of up to 4 percent of annual revenue.It should not be difficult for companies to extend EU practices and policies elsewhere because they already have systems in place, said Nicole Ozer, director of technology and civil liberties at the American Civil Liberties Union of California.Companies' promises are less reassuring than laws, she said: "If user privacy is going to be properly protected, the law has to require it."(Reporting by David Ingram and Joseph Menn in San Francisco; Additional reporting by Salvador Rodriguez ; Editing by Peter Henderson, Bill Rigby and Himani Sarkar)SAN FRANCISCO —  Facebook Inc Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said on Tuesday that he agreed "in spirit" with a strict new European Union law on data privacy but stopped short of committing to it as the standard for the social network across the world.As Facebook reels from a scandal over the mishandling of personal information belonging to millions of users, the company is facing demands to improve privacy and learn lessons from the landmark EU law scheduled to take effect next month.Zuckerberg told Reuters in a phone interview that Facebook was working on a version of the law that would work globally, bringing some European privacy guarantees worldwide, but the 33-year-old billionaire demurred when asked what parts of the law he would not extend worldwide."We're still nailing down details on this, but it should directionally be, in spirit, the whole thing," Zuckerberg said. He did not elaborate.His comments signal that U.S. Facebook users, many of them still angry over the company's admission that political consultancy Cambridge Analytica got hold of Facebook data on 50 million members, could find themselves in a worse position than Europeans.The European law, called the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), is the biggest overhaul of online privacy since the birth of the internet, giving Europeans the right to know what data is stored on them and the right to have it deleted.Apple Inc and some other tech firms have said they do plan to give people in the United States and elsewhere the same protections and rights that Europeans will gain.Shares of Facebook closed up 0.5 percent on Tuesday at $156.11 (£110.8). They are down more than 15 percent since March 16, when the scandal broke over Cambridge Analytica.PUSH FOR DATA PRIVACYPrivacy advocacy groups have been urging Facebook and its Silicon Valley competitors such as Alphabet Inc's Google to apply EU data laws worldwide, largely without success."We want Facebook and Google and all the other companies to immediately adopt in the United States and worldwide any new protections that they implement in Europe," said Jeff Chester, executive director of the Center for Digital Democracy, in Washington.Zuckerberg said many of the tools that are part of the law, such as the ability of users to delete all their data, are already available for people on Facebook."We think that this is a good opportunity to take that moment across the rest of the world," he said. "The vast majority of what is required here are things that we've already had for years across the world for everyone."Google and Facebook are the global leaders in internet ad revenue. Both based in California, they possess enormous amounts of data on billions of people.Google has declined to comment on its plans.When GDPR takes effect on May 25, people in EU countries will gain the right to transfer their data to other social networks, for example. Facebook and its competitors will also need to be much more specific about how they plan to use people's data, and they will need to get explicit consent.GDPR is likely to hurt profit at Facebook because it could reduce the value of ads if the company cannot use personal information as freely and the added expense of hiring lawyers to ensure compliance with the new law.Data is central to Facebook's advertising business, and it has not yet sketched out a satisfying plan for how it plans to comply, said Pivotal Research analyst Brian Wieser."I haven't heard any solutions from Facebook to get ahead of the problem yet," Wieser said.Failure to comply with the law carries a maximum penalty of up to 4 percent of annual revenue.It should not be difficult for companies to extend EU practices and policies elsewhere because they already have systems in place, said Nicole Ozer, director of technology and civil liberties at the American Civil Liberties Union of California.Companies' promises are less reassuring than laws, she said: "If user privacy is going to be properly protected, the law has to require it."(Reporting by David Ingram and Joseph Menn in San Francisco; Additional reporting by Salvador Rodriguez ; Editing by Peter Henderson, Bill Rigby and Himani Sarkar)SAN FRANCISCO —  Facebook Inc Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said on Tuesday that he agreed "in spirit" with a strict new European Union law on data privacy but stopped short of committing to it as the standard for the social network across the world.As Facebook reels from a scandal over the mishandling of personal information belonging to millions of users, the company is facing demands to improve privacy and learn lessons from the landmark EU law scheduled to take effect next month.Zuckerberg told Reuters in a phone interview that Facebook was working on a version of the law that would work globally, bringing some European privacy guarantees worldwide, but the 33-year-old billionaire demurred when asked what parts of the law he would not extend worldwide."We're still nailing down details on this, but it should directionally be, in spirit, the whole thing," Zuckerberg said. He did not elaborate.His comments signal that U.S. Facebook users, many of them still angry over the company's admission that political consultancy Cambridge Analytica got hold of Facebook data on 50 million members, could find themselves in a worse position than Europeans.The European law, called the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), is the biggest overhaul of online privacy since the birth of the internet, giving Europeans the right to know what data is stored on them and the right to have it deleted.Apple Inc and some other tech firms have said they do plan to give people in the United States and elsewhere the same protections and rights that Europeans will gain.Shares of Facebook closed up 0.5 percent on Tuesday at $156.11 (£110.8). They are down more than 15 percent since March 16, when the scandal broke over Cambridge Analytica.PUSH FOR DATA PRIVACYPrivacy advocacy groups have been urging Facebook and its Silicon Valley competitors such as Alphabet Inc's Google to apply EU data laws worldwide, largely without success."We want Facebook and Google and all the other companies to immediately adopt in the United States and worldwide any new protections that they implement in Europe," said Jeff Chester, executive director of the Center for Digital Democracy, in Washington.Zuckerberg said many of the tools that are part of the law, such as the ability of users to delete all their data, are already available for people on Facebook."We think that this is a good opportunity to take that moment across the rest of the world," he said. "The vast majority of what is required here are things that we've already had for years across the world for everyone."Google and Facebook are the global leaders in internet ad revenue. Both based in California, they possess enormous amounts of data on billions of people.Google has declined to comment on its plans.When GDPR takes effect on May 25, people in EU countries will gain the right to transfer their data to other social networks, for example. Facebook and its competitors will also need to be much more specific about how they plan to use people's data, and they will need to get explicit consent.GDPR is likely to hurt profit at Facebook because it could reduce the value of ads if the company cannot use personal information as freely and the added expense of hiring lawyers to ensure compliance with the new law.Data is central to Facebook's advertising business, and it has not yet sketched out a satisfying plan for how it plans to comply, said Pivotal Research analyst Brian Wieser."I haven't heard any solutions from Facebook to get ahead of the problem yet," Wieser said.Failure to comply with the law carries a maximum penalty of up to 4 percent of annual revenue.It should not be difficult for companies to extend EU practices and policies elsewhere because they already have systems in place, said Nicole Ozer, director of technology and civil liberties at the American Civil Liberties Union of California.Companies' promises are less reassuring than laws, she said: "If user privacy is going to be properly protected, the law has to require it."(Reporting by David Ingram and Joseph Menn in San Francisco; Additional reporting by Salvador Rodriguez ; Editing by Peter Henderson, Bill Rigby and Himani Sarkar)(Reuters) - Shares of Acxiom Corp plunged as much as 34 percent on Thursday, after Facebook Inc said it would end its partnerships with several large data brokers who help advertisers target people on the social network.The stock has now lost nearly half of its market value since Facebook's comments on Wednesday that added to fears of increased scrutiny around how public data is handled and shared.Facebook is under pressure to improve how it manages data after disclosing that information on about 50 million Facebook users wrongly ended up in the hands of political consultancy Cambridge Analytica.The social network has for years given advertisers the option of targeting their ads based on data collected by companies such as Acxiom. Facebook's website lists nine third-party data providers that it has worked with, including Acxiom, Experian PLC, Oracle Data Cloud, TransUnion and WPP PLC.Arkansas-based Acxiom, which earns over $800 million a year selling consumer profiles to the world's largest companies, said late on Wednesday it did not expect this change to impact its revenue or earnings for the year ending in March.However, for fiscal year 2019, Acxiom expects total revenue and profitability to be hurt by as much as $25 million."The immediate impact was small. Now the question is how far does Facebook react to its issues," First Analysis analyst Larry Berlin said."A lot of what (Acxiom) is doing is probably not wrong and probably not at the core of the problem that Facebook has. Targeting consumers using data is sometimes very clean and sometimes it isn't."Even with little raw data, third-party data providers like  Acxiom attempt to build detailed pictures of individuals' finances, relationships, personal interests and purchasing tastes.These profiles power targeted advertising across the internet, and can also be used to determine what political issues people are interested in and how they might vote."I welcome Facebook's announcement that it will be shutting down its partner category service, using third party data to inform targeted advertising," said Britain's Information Commissioner Elizabeth Denham in a statement on Thursday.WPP, Experian, TransUnion and Cisco did not immediately respond to requests for comment.Shares of Acxiom were down 32 percent at $19 by midday. The stock touch its lowest in more than 2 years in early trading.TransUnion fell nearly 1 percent, while WPP was down marginally.(Reporting by Sonam Rai in Bengaluru; Editing by Saumyadeb Chakrabarty)LONDON —  I'm 57, with a 30-year-old wife, a fairly new hot water boiler, an old-style television, a petrol car and no kids.Actually, none of that is true. But that is what you might believe if you purchased access to my data from the world's largest information broker by market value.The recent revelation that data miner Cambridge Analytica Ltd. improperly accessed 50 million Facebook users' personal data has heightened public concern about the way companies harvest and use our personal data.I asked Arkansas-based Acxiom Corp., which earns over $800 million a year selling consumer profiles to the world's largest companies, what data and insights it held on me.In Europe and the U.S., companies like Acxiom are allowed to collect data from public and other sources about us. European privacy rules, which are due to be strengthened in coming months, require all data gatherers to disclose to any European who asks what information they hold on them. U.S. law doesn't give Americans the right to this level of disclosure.The result of my inquiry shows how, even with little raw data, companies attempt to build detailed pictures of individuals' finances, relationships, personal interests and purchasing tastes.These profiles now power the elaborate machinery that delivers advertising across the internet, and can also be used to determine what political issues people are interested in and how they might vote.The question is: How accurate are the pictures they sketch?"AFFLUENT FUN SEEKER"Acxiom - like its rivals - operates by gathering publicly available information from sources like the electoral roll, which gives individuals' addresses, and land registry data, which provides details on home ownership such as purchase price and if there is a mortgage on the property.It also buys data from companies that conduct online surveys, as well as websites where you forgot to tick 'don't share with third parties' and other sources. This data is then put into a proprietary model, which produces a list of data points and propensities, such as the likelihood a consumer might visit a betting shop.Acxiom sells access to these profiles to companies that wish to target advertising at potential customers. Acxiom doesn't have a political arm like Cambridge Analytica does, but the two companies do compete for commercial customers.Facebook, in the wake of the scandal over how it handles personal information, said on Wednesday it would end its partnerships with several large data brokers who help advertisers target people on the social network. Shares in Acxiom traded down more than 10 percent to $25 following Facebook's announcement.The results for a single individual obviously don't tell us too much about the accuracy of a database that Acxiom says contains 47 million UK profiles and insights into 700 million consumers worldwide.Also, it seems I am a bad data subject since I usually opt out when asked to give companies data sharing rights."Where we have more self-reported, privacy-compliant data about individuals, we can be more accurate. In your case, we held very little of this data and the majority of the variables linked to you, are modelled, based on both your postcode and the household history," Acxiom said in a statement.My Acxiom profile has around 750 individual data fields under a dozen categories from "household composition" to "employment & income" and "lifestyle & interests." It categorizes me as an “affluent fun-seeker.”. The accuracy of that description depends on your definition, I suppose, but some of the information is plain wrong.To start with, I'm 46 years old, not 57. I won't reveal my wife's age, but I will confirm that when I got married at age 34, it wasn't to a teenager. Two children mean we're not "empty nesters," I drive a diesel car and our boiler is more than 15 years old, not less than five years as Acxiom identifies it as.That could be a disappointment for the companies including Tesco supermarket, Twitter, Ford Motor Company and Facebook to whom Acxiom said it may have provided my data in the past year. Or maybe not.PROFILE ERRORSThe fact that my profile contains errors isn't necessarily a problem for marketers said Carol Hargreaves, a professor and director of the Data Analytics Consulting Center at the National University of Singapore.What really matters is the predictions of one's behavior, interests and propensity to buy certain kinds of products."The things you sell to a male of 46 or a male of 57 are the same," Hargreaves said.In some potentially key areas, the data is certainly better than a random guess. It predicted that I had just a 5.2 percent probability of being self-employed, rather than employed. Official data shows around 17 percent of Britons are self-employed.Acxiom's prediction of my household income was also much closer to the actual number than the average published by the Greater London Authority for my electoral ward, or local electoral district, the narrowest official estimate.But if purchase decisions are driven by lifestyle interests, the data collected on me is of little use to marketers.My predicted annual car mileage was 8,000 to 10,000 miles, based on "modelled probability." This figure echoes the 8,405 miles that car breakdown group the RAC says the average London motorist drives each year. But it's over twice my annual mileage.Acxiom incorrectly says I don't have a flat screen television, something it "derived through modeling," even though a UK government report from 2013 says most households do.One in seven Britons is a member of a gym, according to a 2017 industry survey; Acxiom reckons there's a 47.5 percent chance that I am interested in belonging to a gym. My last subscription expired over a decade ago.Acxiom also thinks I am more likely to be interested in crossword puzzles – I haven't done one since the 1980s – than in current affairs, which has been my working life for 20 years.On the positive side, there are indications Acxiom doesn't engage in racial profiling: The company predicts I have a 13.6 percent probability of interest in regularly going to a bar. I asked Hargreaves, the professor, if this seemed a statistically reasonable estimate for an Irish journalist. After she stopped laughing, Hargreaves said accurate predictions hinged on the raw data on which the profile is based.BAND WAGONAcxiom said individual inaccuracies didn't undermine the value of its service."We know from working with leading brands, that data helps them deliver more accurate and relevant marketing to customers at scale... The key factor here is, 'at scale'," it said in a statement.Annabel Kilner, Chief Commercial Officer at furniture retailer MADE.com said consumer data helped firms deliver messages that consumers found relevant."We adopt a test and learn approach to optimizing our campaigns," Kilner said.Xiaojing Dong, associate professor of marketing and business analytics at Santa Clara University in Silicon Valley, said that qualitative predictions like those produced by Acxiom gave advertisers a much better idea of who they are reaching.But Hargreaves said there was concern among some advertisers that the consumer profiles they purchase from data aggregators may not always be worth the large fees involved. Hargreaves said she is about to start working with clients of companies like Acxiom to ascertain whether they were getting value for money."Some of the data vendors are just jumping on the band wagon," she said.The key to accurate profiling, experts said, was good raw data. The best is held by those companies with whom we have the deepest interactions – social media giants like Facebook or Twitter and retailers like Amazon.com.Stephan Lewandowsky, a professor of cognitive psychology at the University of Bristol in Britain, said that explains why companies like Cambridge Analytica would be so eager to access Facebook data."The difference between using the electoral roll and Facebook is that the information we reveal on Facebook is sufficient for a computer program to infer our personality with greater accuracy than our own spouse," he said.(Reporting by Tom Bergin; Editing by Cassell Bryan-Low)MENLO PARK, Calif. —  "We've made a bunch of mistakes." ''Everyone needs complete control over who they share with at all times." ''Not one day goes by when I don't think about what it means for us to be the stewards of this community and their trust."Sound familiar? It's Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg addressing a major privacy breach — seven years ago .Lawmakers in many countries may be focused on Cambridge Analytica's alleged improper use of Facebook data, but the social network's privacy problems go back more than a decade. Here are some of the company's most notable missteps and promises around privacy.2007The social media darling unveils its Facebook Platform to great fanfare. Zuckerberg says app developers can now access the web of connections between users and their friends, a set of connections Facebook calls the "social graph.""The social graph is changing the way the world works," he says .That November, Facebook launches Beacon , which shares what users are doing on other websites with their Facebook friends. Many users find it intrusive and difficult to disable. Massachusetts resident Sean Lane buys his wife a diamond ring for Christmas on Overstock.com, but Facebook ruins the surprise , an incident leading to a class-action lawsuit.In December, Zuckerberg apologizes and enables users to shut off Beacon. "I know we can do better," he says .2008Facebook launches Facebook Connect , aiming to correct Beacon's mistakes by requiring users to take deliberate action before they share activity from other websites when logged in using Facebook. More than 100 websites use the tool at launch, including CNN and TripAdvisor.2009Facebook announces "privacy improvements" after a yearlong review by Canada's Office of the Privacy Commissioner found that it geared its default privacy settings toward openness, failed to inform users their data would be used to serve ads, and leaked data to third party developers, including when their friends used apps. Facebook vows to encourage "users to review their privacy settings" but does not agree to all the recommendations.Beacon is officially shut down, settling Lane's class action lawsuit.The American Civil Liberties Union warns people that Facebook's default settings mean that when a friend uses an app or takes a quiz, the quiz- or app-maker can peer into your profile, even if you've made it private.2010App-makers exhibit a sophisticated grasp of data they can scoop from Facebook's social graph.The Wall Street Journal reports that many popular apps are transmitting personalized Facebook data to dozens of advertising and internet companies, among them, Zynga's breakout game FarmVille. Facebook responds by shutting down some apps.Prior to the Journal report, Facebook says it has redesigned its privacy tools, giving its 400 million users "the power to control exactly who can see the information and content they share.2011The Federal Trade Commission reaches a consent decree with Facebook after an investigation of its broken privacy promises to consumers.The FTC alleges, among other things, that:—Facebook made its users' friend lists public in December 2009, even if they had been set to private, without telling them.—Even if users limited data sharing to "friends only," data was actually shared with third party apps that friends used.—Facebook failed to verify the security of apps it put on a "verified apps" list.—Facebook promised not to share personal information with advertisers, but did.Facebook promises to submit to a privacy audit every two years for the next 20 years, and Zuckerberg owns up to mistakes.2012Facebook introduces new methods to help advertisers reach people in ways "that protect your privacy," including an encryption tool called Custom Audiences that lets marketers match the email addresses of sales leads to the addresses that Facebook users used to set up their accounts.Facebook also rolls out new privacy tools aimed at simplifying its convoluted and confusing privacy controls. Among other things, it narrows the scope of app permissions so they don't suck in as much user data automatically.2013Facebook shares two-year-old anonymized data on billions of friendships between countries with Cambridge researcher Aleksandr Kogan and co-authors a research paper with him (published in 2015).Kogan creates a quiz app, installed by around 300,000 people , giving him access to tens of millions of their friends' data.2014Facebook says it dramatically limits the access apps have to friend data, preventing the type of data scoop Kogan and others were capable of. It also requires developers to get approval from Facebook before accessing sensitive data.2015Facebook says it learns from Guardian journalists that Kogan has shared data with Cambridge Analytica in violation of its policies. It bans the app and asks Kogan and Cambridge Analytica to certify they had deleted the data.It rolls out "Security Checkup ," a new tool aimed at simplifying its convoluted and confusing privacy controls.2017Facebook introduces "Privacy Basics ," a Frequently Asked Questions site aimed at simplifying its privacy controls.2018Facebook says it learns from The Guardian and other media outlets that Cambridge Analytica did not delete improperly obtained Facebook data and suspends the company, Kogan, and whistleblower Christopher Wylie from its service.Zuckerberg tells CNN that "I'm really sorry that this happened." He promises to audit app makers that gathered massive amounts of data prior to 2014 and to notify affected users. Amid calls for investigations in the U.S. and U.K., the FTC begins investigating whether Facebook broke its 2011 consent decree."Our responsibility now is to make sure that this doesn't happen again," Zuckerberg says.Facebook redesigns its privacy settings menu on mobile devices and says in a blog post, "It's time to make our privacy tools easier to find."___NEW YORK —  Facebook's decision to stop working with third-party data collectors might earn it public-relations points, but it does little to protect your privacy. The social network still has more than enough data on your interests and hobbies to target ads with precision.The company will still tap browser and device IDs to track visits to third-party sites and apps. And it will have lots more information from your use of its service — everything from the businesses and hobbies you "like" to the types of news articles you read and share. The data helps Facebook create profile targets — such as college-educated mothers in Detroit who like ice cream and the band Coldplay — for advertisers to reach.Limiting its partnership with data brokers also doesn't touch on the difficulty Facebook has had keeping your data out of the hands of other companies. The social network is in the spotlight following accusations that a data-mining firm used ill-gotten data from tens of millions of Facebook users to try to influence elections.Facebook may try to defuse that criticism by saying it's backing off on some data use, said Jon Reily, vice president of commerce strategy at the digital consulting company SapientRazorfish. But, he noted, "they didn't need that sixth wheel on a car anyway."In a clear sign of who needs whom more, shares of Acxiom, a leading data collector that Facebook had contracted with, tumbled 19 percent Thursday. Facebook's stock saw a 4 percent gain, reversing some of the big losses it's suffered since the scandal involving Cambridge Analytica, a Trump-affiliated consulting firm, broke almost two weeks ago.Late Wednesday, Facebook said it was shutting down a type of advertising product that allowed marketers to use data from people's offline lives to target them on Facebook. The information includes categories like home ownership and purchase history and comes from some of the world's largest data brokers, including Acxiom, Epsilon and Experian. The decision came on the same day Facebook said it would make it easier to use its privacy controls and to see the data the company collects on its users.These data brokers have troves of data on credit scores, family status, pet ownership and hobbies, which they glean from surveys, warrantee cards, retail loyalty programs and other sources. Brokers typically don't have a direct relationship with consumers, and how they get the data is often questionable, said Peter Reinhardt, CEO of Segment, a consumer data firm."Removing these brokers is a no-brainer, as they add very little incremental value to advertisers and a lot of rightful scrutiny to Facebook," Reinhardt said.Facebook said shutting down the advertising feature over the next six months "will help improve people's privacy on Facebook." But it wouldn't have stopped Cambridge Analytica from grabbing data inappropriately through an app that purported to be a research tool. Though Facebook has clamped down on apps' ability to get data on your friends, it still lets apps collect plenty of data on you. That isn't changing with Wednesday's moves.And even without direct access to the brokers' data, Facebook was already able to build prediction models based on it, said Kenneth Sanford, lead analytics architect at the data science company Dataiku. So Facebook could use that model to ascertain other characteristics of people who buy Purina cat food, even if Facebook no longer gets data on which users indeed bought Purina."In the beginning, Facebook had a tremendous value in knowing those things they didn't otherwise know," Sanford said. "Over time, they've been able to accumulate that information."Besides data brokers, which will lose a source of revenue, advertisers who don't already have a lot of insights on their own customers might suffer in the short term. Debra Aho Williamson, principal analyst at the research firm eMarketer, said those advertisers might cut their spending on Facebook temporarily, but Facebook will try to shift them to its many other methods of ad targeting.Losing access to purchase history could hurt some advertisers. If Purina wants to target cat lovers on Facebook, it might not know that your spouse does the actual buying — and that any advertising targeted at you might be wasted. But experts think such advertisers will just find other sources for that data to restore such insights.David Ciancio, senior customer strategist at the data science specialist Dunnhumby, said the change means little more than "an extra step for advertisers." The effects on Facebook, he said, will be "relatively marginal."___AP Technology Writer Barbara Ortutay contributed to this report.SAN FRANCISCO —  A Facebook Inc executive said in an internal memo in 2016 that the social media company needed to pursue adding users above all else, BuzzFeed News reported on Thursday, prompting  disavowals from the executive and Facebook Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg.The memo from Andrew Bosworth, a Facebook vice president, had not been previously reported as Facebook faces inquiries over how it handles personal information and the tactics the social media company has used to grow to 2.1 billion users.Zuckerberg stood by Bosworth, who goes by the nickname "Boz," while distancing himself from the memo's contents. Bosworth confirmed the memo's authenticity but in a statement he  disavowed its message, saying its goal had been to encourage debate.Facebook users, advertisers and investors have been in an uproar for months over a series of scandals, most recently privacy practices that allowed political consultancy Cambridge Analytica to obtain personal information on 50 million Facebook members. Zuckerberg is expected to testify at a hearing with U.S. lawmakers as soon as April."Boz is a talented leader who says many provocative things. This was one that most people at Facebook including myself disagreed with strongly. We've never believed the ends justify the means," Zuckerberg said in a statement.Bosworth wrote in the June 2016 memo that some "questionable" practices were all right if the result was connecting people."That's why all the work we do in growth is justified. All the questionable contact importing practices. All the subtle language that helps people stay searchable by friends," he wrote in the memo, which BuzzFeed published on its website.He also urged fellow employees not to let potential negatives slow them down."Maybe it costs a life by exposing someone to bullies. Maybe someone dies in a terrorist attack coordinated on our tools. And still we connect people," he wrote.Bosworth said Thursday that he did not agree with the post today "and I didn't agree with it even when I wrote it."Having a debate around hard topics like these is a critical part of our process and to do that effectively we have to be able to consider even bad ideas, if only to eliminate them," Bosworth's statement said.(Reporting by David Ingram; editing by Grant McCool)GENEVA —  The scandal over data privacy that is causing a headache for Facebook Inc shows just one aspect of the huge task of preparing the world for e-commerce, the United Nations trade and development agency UNCTAD said on Wednesday.Facebook has faced a global outcry and its shares have slid in value after a whistleblower said data from millions of users was improperly harvested by consultancy Cambridge Analytica to target U.S. and British voters."The current debate about Facebook and data privacy vividly illustrates that most countries are ill-prepared for the digital economy," UNCTAD Secretary-General Mukhisa Kituyi said in a statement.Data privacy is just one of many boxes that national regulators need to tick if they hope to get a handle on e-commerce, UNCTAD's head of internet and computer technology analysis Torbjörn Fredriksson told a news conference.Other issues include legal questions related to e-transactions and e-signatures, consumer protection online, data protection, cybercrime, taxation and domain names."Then you look at trade logistics, especially to try to address what we call the tsunami of parcels, when people start ordering from online platforms instead of going to the retail shop that has bought everything in bulk," he said.In developing countries, internet purchases are still mainly paid for with cash on delivery, and central banks and finance ministries need to help ensure access to online payment systems, Fredriksson added.But most developing countries are still unclear about whose job it is to coordinate e-commerce, he said.Without online payments, local firms would struggle to export on international e-commerce platforms such as Amazon and Alibaba, while the flood of imports risks creating a trade imbalance."There is some concern that ... there is a risk of concentration of markets among the big platforms," Fredriksson said, adding that UNCTAD was working on ways to address the problem.Although rich countries are thinking about how they need to adapt, poorer countries are largely flying blind, with no data for example on e-commerce circumventing national trade rules, which could help the traffic in counterfeit goods."There are concerns about jobs that may be lost, taxation, customs revenue, there's a whole range of issues that are challenges more than opportunities perhaps," Fredriksson said."Governments are increasingly looking at it, but whether they are looking at it enough is another issue."(Reporting by Tom Miles; Editing by Catherine Evans)JERUSALEM —  Israel announced Wednesday it was launching a domestic digital health database that could make it a global medical powerhouse. The move aims to improve public health worldwide but critics warn it risks compromising personal privacy.Eli Groner, director-general of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's office, said the system could help prevent disease by pairing each individual with his or her own relevant data. With easy access to a person's medical history, he said it may be possible to become informed of a looming disease before one actually contracts it."The database will be unlike anything in the world," Groner said.If successful — something he said depends on the number of those willing to participate — the database could be shared with medical researchers globally and help diagnose trends and help develop better medication worldwide.Groner said the launch is expected by the end of 2018, stressing that divulging data depends on individual consent and that teams are now hammering out details on how to ensure maximum privacy.The innovation is possible in part because of Israel's relatively small size and already centralized health care system. Most of the country's 8.7 million citizens are members of four main health care providers, which have been maintaining their records digitally for years. The new database aims to collect all the information in one place.At his weekly Cabinet meeting, Netanyahu said Sunday the $275 million project is of "historic significance" and that its goal is to improve "preventive medicine" and also achieve "personal medicine, personally calibrated for each person."The announcement comes as Facebook's privacy practices have come under fire following revelations that it failed to prevent the data-mining firm Cambridge Analytica from amassing personal information about millions of users and that the social network has been collecting Android users' phone call and text message histories without notice.Critics say the selling of medical records for profit could spell disaster for patient confidentiality.Tehilla Shwartz Altshuler, a senior fellow at the Israel Democracy Institute, said even data entered anonymously does not guarantee long-term confidentiality and it is unclear what uses will be made in the future with data disclosed now."Medical records are the most private information you could think about, it includes DNA, bloodwork, all medical history," she said. "Stuff you may not want insurance companies, employers, spouses, whoever to know — you don't even want Facebook to know so that it won't be able to mesh it up with other information it has about you."NEW YORK —  The U.S. stock market has taken a beating on the recent technology rout. But for short-sellers, it has been nothing short of a boon.Short-sellers who placed bets that the shares of four big tech leaders, known as the FANG group, as spelled out by their first initials, were due for a fall have made more than $4 billion in profits over the last two weeks and more than $1 billion during the first two trading days in April, financial analytics firm S3 Partners LLC said on Tuesday.The FANG group is comprised of four closely watched internet stocks: Facebook Inc, Amazon.com Inc, Netflix Inc and Alphabet Inc's Google.Doug Kass, who runs hedge fund Seabreeze Partners Management Inc, said he has been shorting Amazon shares because of "the existential threat of regulation has surfaced and has deflated the FANG bubble. Importantly, it is a bipartisan regulatory and antitrust threat."Short-sellers aim to profit by selling borrowed shares on the hope of buying them back later at a lower price and pocketing the difference."Social media's technological achievements and progress have outsped regulatory supervision and oversight," Kass said. He highlighted the recent discovery that information of about 50 million Facebook users had wrongly ended up in the hands of political consultancy Cambridge Analytica as he noted the potential jeopardy of the trust of users, which is  "a fundamental and necessary ingredient to future corporate success and measured in engagement."A strict new European Union law on data privacy takes effect on May 25. Facebook Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg told Reuters on Tuesday that the social network had no immediate plans to apply the law in its entirety to the rest of the world.Governments are also taking action on other fronts. The European Commission last month proposed new rules to ensure that digital business activities are taxed in a fair and growth-friendly way in the EU. Kass also noted the European Union's record $2.7 billion antitrust fine against Google.The overhang of increased government oversight has taken a bite out of the fortunes of large technology companies in the past. Microsoft Corp reached a settlement in an antitrust case with the Department of Justice in 2002 that lasted until 2011, contributing to a long period of underperformance that kept the stock below the high it reached in 1999 until 2016. Since then, the stock is up nearly 60 percent on the strength of its cloud-based services.And not all short bets on tech stocks have been money makers. Some short-sellers have held their bets against the FANGs since the middle of 2017 and have yet to turn a profit.Billionaire investor David Einhorn includes bets against Amazon and Netflix as part of his "bubble basket." While conventional wisdom suggests that recent turbulence in these stocks could have benefited short-sellers, Einhorn said the shorts did not perform as he hoped this year."We believe our investment theses remain intact. Despite recent results, our portfolio should perform well over time," Einhorn said in his quarterly letter to investors on Tuesday.So far this year, Amazon shares are up over 19 percent and Netflix shares have soared nearly 48 percent. Alphabet and Facebook, however, are down year-to-date.(Reporting by Jennifer Ablan and Trevor Hunnicutt; Additional reporting by Svea Herbst-Bayliss; Editing by Leslie Adler)SAN FRANCISCO —  Facebook is expanding its response to people using the platform improperly and on Tuesday said it had deleted hundreds of Russian accounts and pages associated with a "troll factory" indicted by U.S. prosecutors for fake activist and political posts in the 2016 U.S. election campaign.Facebook said many of the deleted articles and pages came from Russia-based Federal News Agency, known as FAN, and that the social media company's security team had concluded that the agency was technologically and structurally intertwined with the St. Petersburg-based Internet Research Agency.Facebook Chief Executive Officer Mark Zuckerberg told Reuters in an exclusive interview that the agency "has repeatedly acted to deceive people and manipulate people around the world, and we don't want them on Facebook anywhere."The world's largest social media company is under pressure to improve its handling of data after disclosing that information about 50 million Facebook users wrongly ended up in the hands of political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, which worked on then-Republican candidate Donald Trump's campaign.The removed accounts and pages were mainly in Russian, and many had little political import, the company said. Previously Facebook focused on taking down fake accounts and accounts spreading fake news.The new policy will include otherwise legitimate content spread by those same actors, Zuckerberg said."It is clear from the evidence that we've collected that those organizations are controlled and operated by" the Internet Research Agency, he added.In February, the agency known as IRA was among three firms and 13 Russians indicted by U.S. Special Counsel Robert Mueller on charges they conspired to tamper in the presidential campaign and support Trump while disparaging Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton.Russian media organization RBC last year reported that FAN and IRA once shared the same street address and had other connections. One of the people that it said made decisions at FAN was indicted by Mueller's office, which is investigating U.S. intelligence agency conclusions that Moscow tried to undermine the democratic process. Russia denies interfering in the elections.BAN ACCOUNTSFacebook disclosed in September that Russians used Facebook to meddle in U.S. politics, posting on the social network under false names in the months before and after the 2016 elections.Zuckerberg said on Tuesday that improved machine learning had helped find connections between the latest posts and IRA. He and Facebook security officials said the company would do the same when they find more legitimate content being pushed out by groups exposed as manipulators."We’re going to execute and operate under our principles," Zuckerberg said. "We don’t allow people to have fake accounts, and if you repeatedly try to set up fake accounts to manipulate things, then our policy is to ban all of your accounts."Zuckerberg said that the standard is high for such retribution toward news organizations and that state-owned media by itself was fine.The company decided to root out as much as it can of IRA, which was involved with posts including sponsoring fake pages that were pro-Trump, pro-border security and protesting police violence against minorities, among other topics.The expanded response could provoke a backlash from Russian internet regulators.Last October, Google followed up on reported connections between FAN and IRA by removing FAN stories from its search index. Media regulator Roskomnadzor asked Google for an explanation, saying that it needed to protect free speech. Google then reinstated FAN, according to reports at the time.Facebook officials said its accounts and pages in question had 1 million unique followers on Facebook and 500,000 on Instagram, mainly in Russia, Ukraine, and nearby countries such as Azerbaijan and Uzbekistan.Zuckerberg, who founded Facebook in his college dorm room in 2004, personally kept quiet about the Cambridge Analytica data leak for four days before apologizing and outlining steps that he said would help protect personal data.The 33-year-old billionaire plans to testify before U.S. lawmakers to explain Facebook's privacy policies, a first for him, a source said last week, although he has so far not committed to doing the same for UK lawmakers.Britain's data protection authority, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission and some 37 U.S. state attorneys general are investigating Facebook's handling of personal data.Zuckerberg initially downplayed Facebook's ability to sway voters, saying days after the U.S. elections that it was a "pretty crazy idea" that fake news stories had an influence.Eventually, though, Facebook's security staff came to the conclusion that the social network was being used by spies and other government agents to covertly spread disinformation among rivals and enemies.Critics including U.S. Senator Mark Warner, the top Democrat on the Senate Intelligence Committee, have complained Facebook moved too slowly to investigate and counter information warfare.Facebook stepped up efforts to shutter fake accounts before  a national election last year in France, and has said it will work with election authorities around the world to try to prevent meddling in politics.The company, which is now one of the main ways politicians advertise to voters, plans to start a public archive showing all election-related ads, how much money was spent on each one, the number of impressions each receives and the demographics of the audience reached.Facebook is on track to bring that data to U.S. voters before congressional elections in November, Zuckerberg said on Tuesday. Facebook plans to send postcards by U.S. mail to verify the identities and location of people who want to purchase U.S. election-related advertising.(Reporting by Joseph Menn and David Ingram; additional reporting by Jack Stubbs; editing by Peter Henderson and Grant McCool)Good Wednesday. Here’s what we’re watching:• Another bank takes steps toward gun safety.• The next steps in the tariffs tit-for-tat.• Investigators are looking into the motive behind the shooting at YouTube’s headquarters.• What happens after Spotify’s direct listing?•  Alexis Ohanian of Reddit speaks to Corner Office about online platforms, fatherhood and Metallica.Get this in your inbox each morning. Sign up here.Britain’s decision to leave the European Union provides pointers for investors as President Trump ratchets up trade tensions with China.In the weeks following Britain’s vote in 2016 for “Brexit,” fears grew that the post-war economic order was under serious threat. But European stock markets recovered, including Britain’s. Investors came to see that the European Union was not going to break up, and Britain was not going to erect tall walls around its economy. Looking back, the panicky early reaction to Brexit seems to have sprung more from a fear of the unknown than any big threats to the global trading system. Investors took a deep breath and gained some perspective.Movements in the United States stock market suggests the same thing is happening in response to President Trump’s trade policies. China on Tuesday evening announced the tariffs it plans in retaliation against those President Trump is threatening. Reacting to China’s announcement, the S.&P. 500 index plunged early on Wednesday but recovered strongly to close up 1.2 percent.Investors may believe China’s move will lead to drawn-out negotiations. Here, Brexit is again illustrative. As the back and forth between the European Union and Britain has gone on, investors have gained more clarity and confidence. If talks between the U.S. and China gain steam, the uncertainty now clouding relations between the two countries may gradually clear.But the standoff between the U.S. and China differs in important ways from the Brexit tensions. The U.S., for instance, is in a much stronger position than Britain. China exports far more to the U.S. than the U.S. does to China. Limiting access to the U.S. economy could hurt China’s growth at a time when it is trying to overhaul important economic sectors. If investors believe that the U.S. can successfully exploit its advantages to make China more friendly to foreign businesses, they may even see the trade skirmish as positive for the global economy.But Brexit also flashes a warning to those expecting a big win for Mr. Trump. One of the reasons that the European Union has presented a united front is that it sees Brexit as a threat to its values and goals. Similarly, China may believe that Mr. Trump’s trade attack puts some of its most deeply held aspirations under threat – and will fight back hard.- Peter EavisAfter Citigroup announced plans to limit firearms sales by business customers, the question was which lenders would be the next to make a move on guns. The latest: Amalgamated Bank, the union-owned bank known for its socially minded policies.The firm said on Wednesday that it would adopt guidelines for lenders laid out by Everytown for Gun Safety, an advocacy group backed by Mike Bloomberg.Among those recommendations:• Require gun dealers to protect merchandise from burglary and theft and refuse sales to people who appear in distress or intoxicated• Require retailers to stop selling high-capacity magazines and bump stocks• Require gun makers to “commit to developing innovations in firearms that will allow law enforcement to more easily solve gun crimes”Amalgamated said that it would not only require all business customers to adhere to those guidelines but added that it won’t invest any of its own money in gun manufacturers or distributors.Here’s what Amalgamated’s C.E.O. Keith Mestrich, said in a news release:— Michael J. de la MercedFacebook on Wednesday said the personal information of up to 87 million people, most of them Americans, may have been improperly shared during the 2016 election with Cambridge Analytica, a political consulting firm connected to President Trump.The new figure sharply increased the company’s previous estimate of how many users’ information was harvested by Cambridge Analytica. The number had been put at more than 50 million users.The sharing of the user data has unleashed a torrent of criticism at Facebook, the world’s largest social network. The company’s stock is down sharply since The New York Times and The Observer of London reported on how Cambridge Analytica improperly acquired users’ data.The company released the revised estimate of affected users in an extended statement on Wednesday about its plans for handling personal data. The company said it will start alerting users on April 9 about whether their information may have been shared with Cambridge Analytica.In related Facebook news• Earlier on Wednesday, lawmakers in Washington had said Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, would testify before the House Energy and Commerce Committee on April 11 about the company’s handling of sensitive user data.Beijing moved quickly to escalate its fight with the U.S., responding to the White House’s latest move with $50 billion worth of tariffs on soybeans, cars, chemicals and more. U.S. market futures predictably dropped, as did other markets.Both sides could suffer. Chinese companies are scrambling to react, especially as the U.S. looks to be taking aim at technology (like that central to Made in China 2025). And the squeeze could extend to American companies in unexpected industries, like wine.The big question: Is a full-blown trade war coming? Nathaniel Taplin of Heard on the Street writes, “If ongoing negotiations fail and these tariffs become a reality, the long-term impact will likely be far more damaging.”And is dragging down the Dow Jones industrial average. The blue-chip index is off nearly 350 points, or 1.4 percent. That slide is worse than the declines of the S.&P. 500 and the Nasdaq Composite, which are both down less than 1 percent.Boeing’s 4 percent fall has shaved 87 points off the Dow Wednesday. Boeing is the highest priced stock in the price-weighted index, which means Boeing has an outsized impact on the index’s moves.Boeing’s shares have served as a proxy for investor concern about a possible trade war with China since the Trump administration announced tariffs on aluminum and steel.Over that period, the stock has fallen 12 percent.The streaming-music company’s shares opened at $165.90, but they steadily decline throughout their first day of trading, closing at $149.01.The stock is down 4.1 percent to $142.91 in early trading Wednesday.Because Spotify eschewed a typical initial public offering in favor of a direct listing, there is no I.P.O. price off which to base the performance of its shares. But the company’s current shares price remains well above the $132.50 its private shares changed hands at earlier this year.Spotify finished Tuesday valued at $26.5 billion. Does that count as a success? Shira Ovide of Gadfly argues no, since only a tiny fraction of Spotify’s shares are available to trade.And will it lead to a wave of direct listings, leaving depressed, workless I.P.O. bankers in its wake? Maybe not, though the Big Board acknowledged signs of more informal interest in direct listings.Sony.Its subsidiary, Sony Music Entertainment, owned 5.7 percent of Spotify ahead of its listing. Sony said it sold 17.2 percent of that stake Tuesday. Sony expects to book a non-operating profit of $986 million this quarter from the increased valuation of the Spotify shares it continues holds and from the share sale.At Tuesday’s close, Sony’s 5.7 percent stake was worth $1.5 billion.Sony isn’t only Asian tech company benefitting from Spotify’s smooth debut. Tencent, the Chinese social media company, holds a 7.5 percent stake. That was worth about $2 billion as of Tuesday’s close.The video site and its parent company, Alphabet, are still grappling with the shooting at YouTube’s headquarters in the Bay Area yesterday. What we know: Police identified the shooter as Nasim Najafi Aghdam, who was in her late 30s and killed herself at the scene. Three people were hurt, one critically.What we don’t know: the motive. Ms. Aghdam, who posted to YouTube and other social media, criticized the video site’s policies on Facebook in February. But authorities haven’t highlighted any specific grievance, and said they had yet to find evidence that specific individuals were targeted.What may change: security in Silicon Valley. YouTube, like many other big tech companies, doesn’t have visible metal detectors or armed guards.• Robert Mueller reportedly told President Trump’s lawyers that he’s a subject of interest, but not yet an investigation target. A former Skadden lawyer who admitted deceiving Mr. Mueller’s investigators, Alex van der Zwaan, was sentenced to 30 days in prison and fined $20,000.• The Treasury Department and the Office of Management and Budget are fighting over how to implement the tax overhaul, as businesses go to great lengths to lower their tax bills.• Senator Elizabeth Warren’s suggested method for measuring misconduct at financial institutions probably wouldn’t lead to more prosecutions. (White Collar Watch)• John Williams is the next president of the New York Fed, despite calls for diversity. (NYT)• Articles about Scott Pruitt are now focusing on ethical improprieties, not regulatory rollbacks. (NYT)At issue in WPP’s inquiry into its C.E.O., Martin Sorrell, are allegations of misuse of company assets and of personal misconduct, according to the WSJ. Mr. Sorrell has denied any wrongdoing.The investigation comes at a tough time: WPP’s revenue is down, and competition from Google and Facebook is up. One of the FT’s unnamed sources couldn’t see how Mr. Sorrell would survive.In other misconduct news: Morgan Stanley fired Douglas Greenberg, a star financial adviser accused of physical abuse and stalking by multiple women, following an NYT investigation.Forbes profiled All Raise, a group of 36 women trying to double the percentage of women in V.C. partner roles and to increase funding to female founders to 25 percent from 15 percent. It has commitments of $2 million from supporters like Silicon Valley Bank and is in talks with Melinda Gates’s investment firm.Diversity, they argue, will help investors spot future successes like Stitch Fix.It’ll be a joust, over money and management. CBS has reportedly submitted a takeover bid for its corporate sibling, Viacom — but one below Viacom’s market value of $12.5 billion, and without a No. 2 slot at the combined company for the target’s C.E.O., Bob Bakish.That isn’t going to sit well with either Mr. Bakish or his patron, Shari Redstone. Tara Lachapelle of Gadfly argues that ego shouldn’t hold up a deal.The deals flyaround• Procter & Gamble is reportedly talking to Pfizer about buying its consumer health business, but far from agreeing on a price. GlaxoSmithKline and Reckitt Benckiser both walked away. (CNBC)• The Justice Department is relying on a skewed study of the Time Warner deal, lawyers for AT&T argued in court. (Bloomberg)• Elliott Management has purchased a $1 billion stake in various affiliates of Hyundai Motors, another venture into Korean chaebols. (Elliott)• The high-end coffee brand La Colombe, reportedly hired Moelis & Company to explore the sale of a stake that could value the company at $1 billion. (Bloomberg)• The Chinese digital conglomerate Meituan has bought Mobike, a bike-sharing company, for $2.7 billion. (CNBC)The Japanese conglomerate has reportedly given up day-to-day control over the Fortress Investment Group to help its deal pass the powerful U.S. security watchdog known as Cfius, according to the FT. That could make the investment firm a less useful support for SoftBank’s $100 billion Vision Fund.The takeaways: The efforts by SoftBank’s Masa Son to court President Trump don’t always translate into favorable treatment by the White House, and national security concerns will weigh heavily on foreign investment in the U.S. post-Broadcom.The president has pressed his claim that Amazon is “costing the United States Postal Service massive amounts of money,” (It isn’t.)Vanity Fair reports that some specific anti-Amazon ideas have been kicked around, including rethinking Amazon’s contract with the U.S.P.S., canceling its cloud services contract with the Pentagon and encouraging state investigations. (Amazon does not have a contract with the Department of Defense for cloud computing services. The contract for those services has not been awarded to any company including Amazon.)But Bloomberg can find no active discussions about such actions, and Wall Street analysts say investors should ignore the noise, which puts Amazon in good company.More on Amazon and the cloud: Mr. Trump was scheduled to dine last night with Safra Catz of Oracle. Why is that important?The tech flyaround• Tesla’s first-quarter production still fell short of an already lowered target, but shares in the embattled carmaker rose anyway. Investors might want to be wary of Elon Musk’s promises.• Facebook removed over 270 accounts and pages tied to Russia’s Internet Research Agency, widely regarded as a troll factory. Mark Zuckerberg won’t globalize Europe’s stricter privacy regulations. Tim Wu of Columbia Law School argues that Facebook needs replacing, not fixing.• India’s government is eager to collect personal data, but bad at protecting it, an NYT Op-Ed contributor argues. (NYT)• Apple has hired John Giannandrea from Google to run its machine learning and A.I. strategy. (NYT)• Deutsche Bank formally named John Thain, Mayree Clark and Michele Trogni to its supervisory board. (Deutsche Bank)• Goldman Sachs has reportedly hired Hari Moorthy, an engineer at JPMorgan Chase, to build tools to help big companies manage cash. (WSJ)• Companies’ charitable spending is more self-serving than they would have us believe. (NYT)• An Indian government crackdown on fake news lasted less than a day. (NYT)• The Chinese conglomerate Anbang will receive $9.7 billion from an industry rescue fund. (WSJ)• Longfin, a fintech company that went public under small-company rules in December, lost 85 percent of value in six trading days and is now under investigation by the S.E.C. (WSJ)• After one of its worst quarters ever, David Einhorn’s hedge fund Greenlight Capital is sticking to its strategy. (CNBC)Note: While we congratulated Villanova yesterday, we did not congratulate Notre Dame for its win on Sunday, which we heartily do so now.Know someone who would enjoy this newsletter? Tell them to sign up here.You can find live updates throughout the day at nytimes.com/dealbook.We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bizday@nytimes.com.SAN FRANCISCO — Worried about someone hacking the next election? Bothered by the way Facebook and Equifax coughed up your personal information?The technology industry has an answer called the blockchain — even for the problems the industry helped to create.The first blockchain was created in 2009 as a new kind of database for the virtual currency Bitcoin, where all transactions could be stored without any banks or governments involved.Now, countless entrepreneurs, companies and governments are looking to use similar databases — often independent of Bitcoin — to solve some of the most intractable issues facing society.“People feel the need to move away from something like Facebook and toward something that allows them to have ownership of their own data,” said Ryan Shea, a co-founder of Blockstack, a New York company working with blockchain technology.The creator of the World Wide Web, Tim Berners-Lee, has said the blockchain could help reduce the big internet companies’ influence and return the web to his original vision. But he has also warned that it could come with some of the same problems as the web.Blockchain allows information to be stored and exchanged by a network of computers without any central authority. In theory, this egalitarian arrangement also makes it harder for data to be altered or hacked.Investors, for one, see potential. While the price of Bitcoin and other virtual currencies have plummeted this year, investment in other blockchain projects has remained strong. In the first three months of 2018, venture capitalists put half a billion dollars into 75 blockchain projects, more than double what they raised in the last quarter of 2017, according to data from Pitchbook.Most of the projects have not gotten beyond pilot testing, and many are aimed at transforming mundane corporate tasks like financial trading and accounting. But some experiments promise to transform fundamental things, like the way we vote and the way we interact online.“There is just so much it can do,” said Bradley Tusk, a former campaign manager for Michael R. Bloomberg, the former mayor of New York, who has recently thrown his weight behind several blockchain projects. “I love the fact that you can transmit data, information and choices in a way that is really hard to hack — really hard to disrupt and that can be really efficient.”Mr. Tusk, the founder of Tusk Strategies, is an investor in some large virtual currency companies. He has also supported efforts aimed at getting governments to move voting online to blockchain-based systems. Mr. Tusk argues that blockchains could make reliable online voting possible because the votes could be recorded in a tamper-proof way.“Everything is moving toward people saying, ‘I want all the benefits of the internet, but I want to protect my privacy and my security,’” he said. “The only thing I know that can reconcile those things is the blockchain.”Blockchains assemble data into so-called blocks that are chained together using complicated math. Since each block is built off the last one and includes information like time stamps, any attempt to go back and alter existing data would be highly complicated. In the original Bitcoin blockchain, the data in the blocks is information about Bitcoin wallets and transactions. The blocks of data in the Bitcoin blockchain — and most of its imitators — are kept by a peer-to-peer computer network.The novel structure allows people to set up online accounts that can securely hold valuable personal information without having to trust a single entity that can hoard, abuse or lose control of the data, as happened with Facebook and the consumer credit reporting agency Equifax.A range of corporations and governments are trying to apply the blockchain model — for projects from the prosaic to the radical. Various departments of the United Nations now have blockchain experiments looking to tackle climate change, the delivery of humanitarian aid and the identity challenges faced by stateless people. Coca-Cola and the State Department recently announced a project to register foreign employees on a blockchain in an attempt to eliminate forced labor.These experiments have drawn skepticism from Bitcoin aficionados, who say blockchains are being applied to problems that could be more easily solved with old-fashioned databases.Other critics say the rapid pace of blockchain development could lead to the same problem facing the broader tech industry: a willingness to disrupt and overthrow old systems before the replacement has been thoroughly tested.“The blockchain industry is ready and waiting to say, ‘Yes, we are the solution,’ and they have every incentive to do so,” said Angela Walch, a research fellow at the Center for Blockchain Technologies at University College London. “But somebody needs to ask the question: ‘Is it actually better? Is it measurably better?’”Many blockchain projects opened themselves to criticism and regulatory scrutiny by raising money through so-called initial coin offerings last year. These fund-raising campaigns often brought in tens of millions of dollars in minutes with little regulatory oversight.But new blockchain efforts continue apace, motivated in no small part by concerns about the emergence of internet giants like Facebook and YouTube.Most of the biggest internet companies make their money from collecting personal information and using it to sell targeted advertisements. This kind of massive data collection makes them vulnerable to hackers and outsiders who want to leverage the data — as was evident when Cambridge Analytica improperly gained access to 50 million Facebook profiles. And start-ups are using the blockchain in an attempt to pry control of all that data out of their hands.Blockstack has built a way to record the basic details about your identity on a blockchain database and then use that identity to set up accounts with other online projects that are built on top of it.The animating force behind the project is that users — rather than Blockstack or any other company — would end up in control of all the data they generate with any online service.Blockstack is one of several blockchain-based projects hoping to create a new generation of online services that don’t rely on having unfettered access to our personal information.The idea has gained enough steam that in the days after news of Facebook’s relationship with Cambridge Analytica broke, Twitter was filled with people calling for blockchain-based alternatives.“As Facebook is collapsing we need to replace it with a blockchain based, decentralized platform!” one user, @GerdMoeBehrens, wrote.“#blockchain WE NEED U NOW!!!” wrote another, @andymartin46.But Mr. Berners-Lee has warned that the development of the blockchain could come with unintended consequences, like more activity from criminals operating outside the oversight of governments.Even blockchain advocates say the hype has conditioned people to think that good answers are close at hand, when it could take five or 10 years for the technology to properly develop.In fact, most blockchain projects are still plagued by concerns about privacy. For example, the widely used Bitcoin blockchain allows certain data — details of the transactions between users — to be seen by anyone, even if other data — the users’ identities — remains obscured. Voting start-ups have solved this by encrypting the data before putting it on a blockchain, but there are questions about whether this will solve other privacy concerns.Blockchain-based accounts also rely on users keeping their own passwords or private keys, which people are famously bad at doing. With Bitcoin, when people lose their private key they lose access to the money in their account — if someone lost the private key to a blockchain-based online account, they could lose access to their identity.“We’re not saying that tomorrow you can flip the switch and a blockchain is going to solve these problems,” said Michael Casey, a co-author of “The Truth Machine,” a new book on the blockchain. “What’s important is how it opens the door to a new way of thinking about the problems we face.”(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning. Outrage in Russia, a secret visit to Beijing and an abortion debate in Germany. Here’s the latest:• Pressure is building in Russia.President Vladimir Putin declared a nationwide day of mourning over the mall fire in Kemerovo that killed at least 64 people, including many children.As Mr. Putin blamed “criminal negligence” for the fire, thousands of people, above, protested nearby to demand transparency and accountability. “I no longer have a family,” one demonstrator said. “The ruling regime is guilty.”And after the mass expulsions of Russian diplomats over the poisoning of a Russian ex-spy on British soil, some in the Kremlin say tensions with the West could become more volatile than during the Cold War._____• A surprise international debut.North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, met secretly with China’s president, Xi Jinping, in Beijing. The clandestine discussions came weeks before planned summit meetings with American and South Korean leaders.It was Mr. Kim’s first trip outside North Korea since taking power six years ago, and may signal that he is trying to soothe strained relations amid the rush of global diplomacy around North Korea’s nuclear weapons program.China confirmed the trip this morning only after Mr. Kim left Beijing on the same armored train that stirred speculation when it arrived mysteriously in the Chinese capital on Monday. (Mr. Kim’s father and grandfather, the North’s former leaders, used similar trains for foreign trips.)Meanwhile, a new North Korean reactor appears to be coming online._____• Repeal America’s right to bear arms?John Paul Stevens, a retired U.S. Supreme Court justice, writes in a Times Op-Ed that scrapping the Second Amendment would move gun-law campaigners “closer to their objective than any other possible reform.”Mr. Stevens argues that, until a 2008 Supreme Court ruling, there was no absolute right to guns. He calls the amendment “a relic,” and says it needs to go.Separately, the National Rifle Association acknowledged that it accepts foreign donations but said it does not use them for election work, a response to growing pressure from federal investigators examining whether Russia used the group to influence the 2016 presidential election._____• A Nazi-era law  in Germany forbids doctors to advertise publicly that they perform abortions.Chancellor Angela Merkel, above, pledged to change the law, but a spiraling debate over the issue is driving a wedge in her new government.Meanwhile, a top Moscow avant-garde theater performing in Berlin is drawing attention to the plight of its leader, who is under house arrest in Russia and is an outspoken critic of President Vladimir Putin._____• If Carles Puigdemont, the former leader of Catalonia who was seized in Germany on Sunday, is returned to Spain, a trial could backfire by galvanizing the Catalan separatist movement. Above, a supporter of secession during a protest in Barcelona yesterday.But Mr. Puigdemont's arrest is already posing a test for European cohesion._____• Cosmetic surgery for a fish?That may sound extreme. But the Asian arowana, above, is not your average pet store fish.They’re a prized status symbol across Asia, with price tags that can reach tens of thousands of dollars. So for owners, less than $100 for an eyelift or chin job is pocket change.• H&M, one of the world’s biggest clothing retailers, has reported terrible results. Even worse: It has a $4 billion pile of clothes no one wants to buy.• Cambridge Analytica, the firm at the center of the Facebook data scandal, got help from an employee at Palantir Technologies, a top Silicon Valley contractor to American spy agencies that was co-founded by Peter Thiel, a supporter of President Trump.• Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, agreed to testify before Congress over the social network’s handling of customer data.• President Trump’s first major trade deal, with South Korea, may have been driven by looming talks with North Korea.• After Citigroup limited firearm sales by its retail clients, our business columnist suggested two more steps that banks could take to influence the gun control debate.• “Green gold.” How the avocado became the fruit of global trade.• U.S. stocks were lower. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.• The whistle-blower Christopher Wylie, above, who helped found Cambridge Analytica, told Britain’s Parliament that data-mining had swung the Brexit referendum. [The New York Times]• Hungary’s anti-immigrant prime minister, Viktor Orban, has waged a war on his nation’s democracy. Now, some fear his relentless remolding of Hungarian society. [The New York Times]• France’s top appeals court upheld a 30,000 euro fine against the National Front founder Jean-Marie Le Pen for dismissing Nazi gas chambers as a “detail” of World War II. [Politico]• Are you a U.S. citizen? The 2020 U.S. census will ask respondents that question to measure how many people are eligible to vote. Critics say it will result in a significant undercount of the population. [The New York Times]• Cyberattacks on Atlanta’s city government have crippled its computer networks and forced it back to doing business with ink and paper. [The New York Times]• A waiter in Canada was fired for rude behavior. His excuse: he’s French. [The Washington Post]Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• Encourage great hotel service by following these tips.• Determine whether your sickness is contagious.• Recipe of the day: Tonight, bake a lemon tart with a filling that’s somewhere between a custard and a pudding.• An American man, above, was wrongfully convicted of rape and murder and spent 23 years behind bars. This week, he returned to work as a groundskeeper for the Chicago White Sox baseball team.• A scientist searches for the world’s last remaining quiet places. This virtual reality Op-Doc takes you to a remote rain forest for a new perspective on the power of silence.• And the secrets of cockroaches: They can live for a week without a head and run as fast as 210 miles an hour, relative to their size. All of those feats, and more, are encoded in the insect’s genome, which scientists recently finished sequencing.Each week, The Times’s crossword column, Wordplay, highlights the answer to one of the most difficult clues from the previous week’s puzzles.This week’s word: torii.Torii (pronounced TOR-ee-ee) are familiar as a symbol of Japan, but many solvers were unsure of the word when it appeared in the March 20 puzzle with the clue “Traditional Japanese gate.” It has appeared 63 times in Times crosswords.These gates, which have a traditional shape and structure, are closely related to the Shinto religion. Typically located at the entrance of Shinto shrines or in spots that hold special religious significance, they signal to worshipers a transition from the profane world to the sacred. By walking through the torii, one has entered the world of the Kami, or Shinto gods.The earliest documentation of the torii in Japan dates to 922 A.D., during the Heian period.The structure of the torii varies, but the most important parts are the pillars (hashira), the lintel placed on the two pillars (kasagi) and a tie-beam that keeps the structure together (nuki).For the easier puzzles at the beginning of the week, the word might also appear with the clue: “Shinto temple gateway” or “Shinto gateway.”Later in the week, it might be referred to as: “Shinto shrine entrance,” “Traditional Japantown feature,” “Decorative gateway in Japan” or “Japanese portal.”Deb Amlen contributed reporting._____Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.Check out this page to find a Morning Briefing for your region. (In addition to our European edition, we have Australian, Asian and U.S. editions.)Sign up here to receive an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights, and here’s our full range of free newsletters.What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.___At the brink: US and China threaten tariffs as fears riseWASHINGTON (AP) — The world's two biggest economies stand at the edge of the most perilous trade conflict since World War II. Yet there's still time to pull back from the brink. Financial markets trembled Wednesday at the prospect of a U.S.-China trade war after Beijing and Washington proposed tariffs on $50 billion worth of each other's products in a battle over the aggressive tactics China employs to develop its high-tech industries.___Facebook scandal affected more users than thought: up to 87MNEW YORK (AP) —Facebook says tens of millions more people might have been exposed in the Cambridge Analytica privacy scandal than previously thought, up to 87 million instead of the 50 million reported before. Facebook says it will restrict the data it allows outsiders to access on its users. Those developments come as congressional officials said CEO Mark Zuckerberg will testify next week, while Facebook has a new privacy policy that aims to explain the data it gathers on users more clearly.___Police: YouTube shooter was calm when found sleeping in carSAN BRUNO, Calif. (AP) — The woman who shot and wounded three people at YouTube headquarters calmly told police who found her sleeping in her car that she was having family problems and had left her home. Authorities say Nasim Aghdam did not mention being angry with YouTube and gave no indication she was a threat to anyone. Later that day, she went to a gun range before walking into a courtyard at YouTube's campus south of San Francisco. That's where she fired a handgun several times and then killed herself.___On the Money: Glut of used cars gives buyers more optionsDETROIT (AP) — Bargain prices on 2- and 3-year-old vehicles fueled record sales of used cars, trucks and SUVs last year, a trend that is expected to continue because people can save thousands of dollars over buying new. Used car sales hit 39.2 million vehicles in 2017, more than double the number of new automobiles sold, according to the Edmunds.com auto website. About 4 million leased vehicles will return to the market this year, many of them relatively new with most of the technology that's on new vehicles.___AMC to open Saudi Arabia's first movie theaterNEW YORK (AP) — AMC says it will open Saudi Arabia's first movie theater on April 18. Cinema operators are rushing to build theaters in the Gulf kingdom after the Saudi government in December said it would open the country to commercial movie theaters for the first time in more than 35 years. AMC's first theater will open in Riyadh. It plans to open up to 100 theaters by 2030.___Marijuana not part of North Dakota's corporate farming banBISMARCK, N.D. (AP) — A North Dakota official says the state's Great Depression-era law banning corporate farming won't preclude horticulture operations from growing medical marijuana, provided it's not done on agricultural land. Attorney General Wayne Stenehjem issued the opinion at the request of the state health department. The intent of the corporate farming law is to protect the state's family farming heritage. But Stenehjem says the marijuana question is a tax law matter that doesn't fall under farming law.___CVS Health eyes kidney patients for next expansion into careWOONSOCKET, R.I. (AP) — CVS Health is now planning to treat kidney failure patients as the drugstore operator branches deeper into monitoring and providing care. The company said Wednesday it will offer home dialysis for patients through its Coram business and it is working with another company to develop a new device for that. A spokeswoman declined to name the company or say how much CVS is spending on the venture.___US services firms grew at a slower pace in MarchBALTIMORE (AP) — U.S. services firms expanded at a slower clip in March compared to the prior month, largely because the pace of business activity and new orders fell. The Institute for Supply Management says its services index dropped to 58.8 from 59.5 in February. Any reading above 50 points toward growth. The services sector has been expanding for more than eight years.___Stocks surge as market escapes early plunge on trade fearsNEW YORK (AP) — After being spooked by rising trade tensions between the US and China, stocks rallied Wednesday on hopes the two sides will settle their differences. The Dow Jones industrial average recovered from an early 501 point drop to gain 230. Retailers and household goods makers climbed while tech stocks reversed losses. Big industrials such as Boeing and Deere were lower.___The Standard & Poor's 500 index climbed 30.24 points, or 1.2 percent, to 2,644.69. The Dow Jones industrial average advanced 230.94 points, or 1 percent, to 24,264.30. The Nasdaq composite rose 100.83 points, or 1.5 percent, to 7,042.11. The Russell 2000 index of smaller-company stocks gained 19.51 points, or 1.3 percent, to 1,531.66.U.S. crude dipped 14 cents to $63.37 a barrel in New York while Brent crude, used to price international oils, fell 10 cents to $68.02 a barrel in London. Wholesale gasoline stayed at $1.98 a gallon. Heating oil lost 2 cents to $1.98 a gallon. Natural gas rose 2 cents to $2.72 per 1,000 cubic feet.Your company, 23andMe, does DNA tests that can tell you what countries your ancestors were from or what genetic diseases you may have or, most important, whether you suffer from “asparagus pee.” But your ultimate ambition is to take data culled from your customers’ DNA and use it to find cures and develop drugs. Why? The health care ecosystem that exists today is a $3-trillion-a-year economy and no one makes money if you stay healthy. There’s very little money that goes into prevention programs, and I think that’s not reflective of what you and I want. What we really care about most is not “How do I manage my Alzheimer’s?” but “How do I never get it in the first place?”Doesn’t 23andMe care about making money, too? We do. What I genuinely spend my nights thinking about is: Is there a way to monetize prevention? I don’t know exactly what that model is, but I know it’s the right thing to do. I stay up late at night thinking about this.You have some pretty lofty goals. Is there a specific event or milestone you would consider a marker of success? I would personally like to live and be healthy at 100. Success for me is healthy at 100. I’m only 44, but I would like all of us to be healthy at 100.If 23andMe ends up discovering a cure for Alzheimer’s or asparagus pee, will its customers, whose DNA contributed to the discovery, get a piece of those profits? We get that question a lot. It’s really hard to figure out microattributions. Pinpointing exactly what each person’s contribution to the entire process — the 11-year journey of development — is pretty hard. I do think we have an obligation of some sort.23andMe has partnerships with lots of third parties. Has the Facebook/Cambridge Analytica scandal given you any second thoughts about how you share data with other companies? I have to say, because we’re regulated, it’s a very different world for us than it is for Facebook. I think that one of the benefits is that it made us go a little bit slower. It’s an extra step of checkpoints about how you’re doing things.The site uses your DNA to match you with other relatives in the 23andMe database. How often do you hear about people who discover they’re actually adopted or have a secret sibling? Every day. Every day. The nonpaternity average in this country is much higher than people think it is. There’s a good chance there’s an “Uncle Joe” in your family who’s actually just “Joe.” So everyone has a story like that; they just don’t necessarily know it. In the early days, we wondered: How are we going to handle this? And in some ways, I think we’ve helped normalize it.The most popular things that people search for alongside your name are “net worth,” “A-Rod” and “Alex Rodriguez.” Why do you think people find your former relationship with A-Rod so fascinating? In some ways it’s a lot like genetics: On the outside we seem very different. On the inside, there were a lot of similarities. I have a lot of respect for him. There’s people in the world who talk a lot about what they want to do, and there’s people who do it. And that boy, he goes after the world with a voracious appetite.Can I ask you about whether gene stuff that happened in movies will ever happen in real life? Sure.With gene engineering available to only the wealthy, society will break down into two social classes, the modified and the unmodified. That’s “Gattaca.” No. By the time there’s really gene-editing ability, it’s going to be accessible to the majority of the population. Also, I think we’re a ways off from actually knowing how to modify. The human body is spectacularly complex beyond anything you could imagine.Will we ever bring a dinosaur back to life? I don’t think that’s feasible. But those are the things I dream about. Maybe I’ll think about that tonight instead of monetizing prevention.SAN FRANCISCO — Two days after Donald J. Trump won the 2016 election, executives at Google consoled their employees in an all-staff meeting broadcast around the world.“There is a lot of fear within Google,” said Sundar Pichai, the company’s chief executive, according to a video of the meeting viewed by The New York Times. When asked by an employee if there was any silver lining to Mr. Trump’s election, the Google co-founder Sergey Brin said, “Boy, that’s a really tough one right now.” Ruth Porat, the finance chief, said Mr. Trump’s victory felt “like a ton of bricks dropped on my chest.” Then she instructed members of the audience to hug the person next to them.Sixteen months later, Google’s parent company, Alphabet, has most likely saved billions of dollars in taxes on its overseas cash under a new tax law signed by Mr. Trump. Alphabet also stands to benefit from the Trump administration’s looser regulations for self-driving cars and delivery drones, as well as from proposed changes to the trade pact with Mexico and Canada that would limit Google’s liability for user content on its sites.Once one of Mr. Trump’s most vocal opponents, Silicon Valley’s technology industry has increasingly found common ground with the White House. When Mr. Trump was elected, tech executives were largely up in arms over a leader who espoused policies on immigration and other issues that were antithetical to their companies’ values. Now, many of the industry’s executives are growing more comfortable with the president and how his economic agenda furthers their business interests, even as many of their employees continue to disagree with Mr. Trump on social issues.The relationship remains bumpy. Mr. Trump lashed out at Amazon on Twitter on Thursday, accusing the e-commerce giant of evading taxes. (Amazon said it had saved $789 million under the tax law Mr. Trump signed.) The president is also expected to sign legislation,  passed by the Senate last week, that would strengthen policing of sex trafficking online — a bill that internet companies once opposed because they worried it would make them liable for content posted by their users.Yet quietly, the tech industry has warmed to the White House, especially as companies including Alphabet, Apple and Intel have benefited from the Trump administration’s policies.Those include lowering corporate taxes, encouraging development of new wireless technology like 5G and, so far, ignoring calls to break up the tech giants. Mr. Trump’s tougher stance on China may also help ward off industry rivals, with the president squashing a hostile bid to acquire the chip maker Qualcomm this month. And Mr. Trump let die an Obama-era rule that required many tech start-ups to give some workers more overtime pay.Mr. Trump “has been great for business and really, really good for tech,” said Gary Shapiro, who leads the Consumer Technology Association, the largest American tech trade group, with more than 2,200 members including Apple, Google, Amazon and Facebook.Mr. Shapiro said that he had voted for Hillary Clinton, Mr. Trump’s opponent, in 2016, but that he and many tech executives had come around on Mr. Trump. While they disagree with him on immigration and the environment, they have found areas where their interests align, like deregulation and investment in internet infrastructure.“This isn’t Hitler or Mussolini here,” Mr. Shapiro said. And even though the president’s new tariffs on steel and aluminum could hurt American businesses and consumers, “disagreement in one area does not mean we cannot work together in others,” Mr. Shapiro said. “Everyone who is married knows that.”Mr. Trump himself has taken to naming tech companies he says are on his side.After Apple took advantage of the new tax law in January to bring back most of the $252 billion cash hoard that it had parked overseas, the company said it would make a $350 billion “contribution to the U.S. economy” over the next five years. That prompted Mr. Trump to suggest he had made good on a campaign pledge to get Apple to bring jobs back to the United States.“You know, for $350 million, you could build a beautiful plant. But for $350 billion, they’re going to build a lot of plants,” the president told members of Congress last month. Mr. Trump said he had called Timothy D. Cook, Apple’s chief executive, to personally thank him.In fact, Apple has no plans to build a plant in the United States. The company is uneasy with Mr. Trump’s invoking it to signify how his policies are working, according to a person close to Apple who was not authorized to speak publicly. Apple has not, however, publicly corrected the president.Mr. Trump has also stayed quiet on the controversy engulfing Facebook over user privacy, while other politicians have called for more regulations after revelations that the British political consulting firm Cambridge Analytica improperly harvested the information of 50 million Facebook users. Cambridge Analytica used that data to aid Mr. Trump’s campaign.Michael Kratsios, the White House’s deputy chief technology officer, said in an interview that while Mr. Trump and Silicon Valley had their differences, “in places where we do see eye to eye, I think we’re achieving extraordinary success.”Dean Garfield, head of the Information Technology Industry Council, a 102-year-old advocacy group that represents the biggest tech firms, said his members walked a tightrope, supporting and opposing the president on different issues. Lately, he said, “we have reached balance in the tightrope.”The equilibrium marks a turnabout from what had been a testy relationship between Mr. Trump and the tech sector. On the campaign trail in 2016, Mr. Trump was so critical of tech companies that Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s chief executive, once joked he might send Mr. Trump to space in a rocket.Some tech executives have since disagreed with Mr. Trump on social issues. Mr. Cook emailed staff last June to say he had unsuccessfully lobbied the president to remain in the Paris climate accords. In November, Microsoft sued the administration to protect a law that blocks deportation of young undocumented immigrants known as Dreamers. More than 100 companies, including Google, Facebook and Uber, filed a brief supporting California’s lawsuit on that issue.Even so, tech executives worked to build a relationship with the president, with some meeting him at Trump Tower before his inauguration and again at the White House in June. While in Washington for the second meeting, Mr. Cook and Satya Nadella, Microsoft’s chief executive, also dined with Jared Kushner, the president’s senior adviser and son-in-law, and Ivanka Trump at the couple’s Washington home, according to a person briefed on the meeting who wasn’t authorized to speak publicly about it. This month, Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin visited Apple’s headquarters.Silicon Valley has found plenty to like about the Trump presidency. In September, tech giants including Facebook and Microsoft teamed up with the administration to pledge $500 million to computer science education. Amazon, Microsoft and Google are also eyeing the administration as a potential customer as Mr. Trump pushes to modernize the government’s digital infrastructure.But Silicon Valley’s favorite thing about Mr. Trump is almost certainly his new tax code. Many tech companies lobbied for corporate tax reform for years before Mr. Trump signed the new tax bill.Tech giants immediately reaped the benefits. Under the new rules, Apple saved $43.7 billion in taxes, according to the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy, a nonpartisan research group. Apple then announced the $350 billion “contribution” to the economy over five years.Most of the tally was previously planned spending with American suppliers and a $38 billion tax payment on its overseas cash. But Apple also said it planned to hire 20,000 new workers, invest in new data centers and another domestic campus, and increase a fund for innovative American manufacturers to $5 billion from $1 billion. It also gave employees $2,500 bonuses.The president was quick to tweet the news.The shifting relationship between Silicon Valley and Mr. Trump appears to have upset some tech employees. A Facebook page called “Angry Googler,” with nearly 1,000 followers, has been dedicated to criticizing Google for any sign it was cooperating with the president.“Not happy about Google pulling a 180 and jumping into bed with Trump? Same here,” said the “About” section of the page, which suggests it is run by a Google employee. This month, the page posted an article about Google helping the Defense Department analyze drone footage. “We’ve gone from organizing the world’s information to … optimizing weapons of war,” the page said.Messages to the account were not returned. Google declined to comment.Some tech firms remain discomfited about appearing as the president’s allies. Last month, Rob Goldman, Facebook’s vice president of advertising, played down Russia’s impact on the 2016 election after the Justice Department charged 13 Russians with trying to subvert its outcome, including by using Facebook. Mr. Trump retweeted Mr. Goldman approvingly.Facebook was uncomfortable with that association with the president, said a person close to the company who was not authorized to speak publicly.Two days later, Facebook’s policy chief, Joel Kaplan, distanced the company from Mr. Goldman’s comments.“The special counsel has issued its indictments, and nothing we found contradicts their conclusions,” he said in a statement. “Any suggestion otherwise is wrong.”Good Wednesday. Here’s what we’re watching.• Are we witnessing the end of the tech mania?• Amazon has shed more than $50 billion in market value.•Are investors waking up to Tesla’s real problem?• Mark Zuckerberg agreed to testify before Congress.• SoftBank and Saudi Arabia are planning the world’s largest solar energy project.Get this in your inbox each morning. Sign up here.Investors, always willing to believe in technology companies, spent the last three years piling into the shares of companies like Facebook, Amazon and Netflix with special abandon. Now the intellectual underpinnings of the tech rally are being seriously tested.Stocks in the best-known tech companies have plunged in recent days. The NYSE FANG+ index, which tracks the share price of 10 companies, including Facebook, Apple and Amazon, has fallen nearly 14 percent from its recent high. Given that the index has soared 50 percent in just the past 12 months, the recent decline could just be the sort of sell-off that punctuates any long-term rally.Still, several large tech companies suddenly face challenges that could undermine their ability to transform whole industries. And as we’ve seen after previous fervors, investors can take a long time to regain their faith.Facebook is down 20 percent from its recent high. Most of the slide came after news reports showing how the company’s data was misused. Investors have to grapple with the possibility that Facebook won’t be sharing as much data as it does, undermining its ability to generate ever-increasing amounts of advertising revenue.Nvidia, a computer chip maker intent on being a leader in automated driving technology, is off 12 percent from its recent high. The company said on Tuesday that it would halt tests of its autonomous driving technology on public roads after an Uber self-driving car hit and killed a pedestrian in Arizona.Tesla is not a tech stock, but it is included in the FANG+ index, and its supporters believe deeply in its power to revolutionize the auto industry. Growing fears about Tesla’s ability to finance its expansion have helped drag its stock down 33 percent from its recent high. Ominously, the price of Tesla’s bonds is also falling, signaling that the company is losing the confidence of creditors.Of course, on their march higher, tech stocks overcame obstacles, like management problems at Uber and the poor performance of Snap’s initial public offering.But the latest problems have raised deeper, broader doubts, and that may keep the uncertainty around longer. Investors have viewed automated driving technology as a huge potential source of growth for some companies. But after the Uber incident in Arizona, those companies may take a more realistic look at what they have to spend to create a technology that is efficient and safe, and conclude that they have to pull out of the race or pare back. Users of social media and regulators may prevent social media companies from sharing so much of their data with advertisers, and that could restrain revenue growth.And if the passion for two or three big tech companies wanes, the cooling may spread.— Peter EavisThe reason?Reports that President Trump wants to rein in the e-commerce giant.Jonathan Swan of Axios, citing anonymous sources, reported:Mr. Swan added:Shares of Amazon have tumbled more than 7 percent at one point Wednesday, but they pared those losses after a White House official told Reuters there were no specific policy changes related to Amazon being considered at the moment. But the official added that the administration is always looking at different options on a range of policy issues.How concerned should investors be?GBH Insights analyst Daniel Ives writes:Guess which companies are benefiting from Amazon's woes? Retailers, the FT points out.On a day when the stocks on Wall Street are flat, Macy’s was up 3.5 percent, J.C. Penney has gained 5.5 percent, Walmart rose 1.7 percent, Target increased 1.8 percent, and Kohl’s was up 2.4 percent.The electric carmaker’s shares are down 7 percent Wednesday, after plunging 8 percent on Tuesday.Tuesday’s slide was driven, in part, by the National Transportation Safety Board’s announcement that it was investigating a fatal crash last week involving a Tesla vehicle in California. News that Jaguar Land Rover was teaming up with Alphabet Inc.’s Waymo unit probably didn't help either.But the continued decline in Tesla’s stock — its shares are down more than 20 percent since mid-March — speaks to the bigger concern surrounding Tesla: How it funds itself.Investors have grown increasingly worried as Tesla burns through cash and struggles to meet its own production goals for the Model 3. Late Tuesday, Moody’s downgraded Tesla’s credit rating further into junk territory and said its outlook on the company is negative. The credit ratings agency cited production delays and said Tesla may soon need to raise more than $2 billion.Those concerns can be seen not just in Tesla’s stock price but also in the trading of its debt. The FT points out that “Tesla’s eight-year bond maturing in 2025 traded on Wednesday at 87.6 cents to the dollar, the lowest since issuance. The yield has surged to 7.5 percent from 6.59 percent on Monday.”Liam Denning of Bloomberg Gadfly writes:The fallout from Facebook’s Cambridge Analytica scandal has spread to Twitter.The stock tumbled 12 percent Tuesday after Citron Research’s Andrew Left said he was betting against the social media company because of its vulnerability to regulation around how it handles user data.But analysts at Barclays disagree. They argue in a recent note to clients that Twitter’s data business likely won’t be impacted much by any regulation on its use of user data. The credit reporting company named Mark Begor, a private equity executive who once led General Electric’s credit card business, as its new chief executive.Mr. Begor, 59, takes over for Paulino do Rego Barros Jr., who has filled the role on an interim basis since September, when Richard F. Smith stepped down after a data breach exposed sensitive personal information, including Social Security numbers, of 148 million people.Mr. Begor will start at Equifax on April 16.About Mr. Begor• The 59-year-old is a managing director at the private equity firm Warburg Pincus. He is also a member of the board at the credit-scoring company FICO.• Mr. Begor spent 35 years at General Electric, where his duties included leading the conglomerate’s real-estate investment and energy management units. For nine years, he was president and chief executive of the company’s consumer credit business, which was later spun off as Synchrony Financial.His pay packageEquifax said it would give Mr. Begor stock and options valued at $17 million this year and an annual salary and bonus of up to $4.5 million.President Trump has scored a significant trade deal with South Korea.But with Mr. Trump preparing to meet with North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un — who just took an armored train trip to Beijing — and the North apparently pressing on with nuclear developments, an “America first” trade stance was far from the only thing pushing the South to sign. More from Michael D. Shear and Alan Rappeport:The Trump administration continues to ramp up its trade rhetoric with China. Unidentified sources told Bloomberg that it is considering invoking an emergency law to restrict Chinese investments in sensitive U.S. tech. A separate plan to enact tariffs on $60 billion of Chinese goods has left companies wondering which industries will be targeted. Other Asian countries increasingly fear being caught in the crossfire of a trade war, the WSJ reports.And nations are already reacting to Trump’s trade moves, erecting  barriers to stop the steel and aluminum that faces tariffs in the U.S. being dumped in their markets.Against this background, NXP sold its 40 percent stake in a Chinese joint venture on chip design.Companies like Facebook, Amazon and Alphabet have delivered some of the best returns to investors in recent years, powered by the achievements and the promise of social media and artificial intelligence.But that confidence is evaporating, as investors brace for intensified regulatory scrutiny across the industry. Tech stocks took a pummeling yesterday and in early European trading.Twitter dropped 12 percent after Andrew Left’s Citron Research said it was shorting the company.Critic’s corner: The “sector’s growing clout over everyday life also raises the risks of what can go wrong,” Dan Gallagher argues at WSJ’s Heard on the Street.The public outcry over Facebook’s data and privacy settings has grown loud enough that Mark Zuckerberg now says he’s willing to testify to Congress. The company is on a hiring spree for lobbyists, too, and unnamed sources say it’s putting off the promotion of new home products.The man who started all this, the Cambridge Analytica whistle-blower Christopher Wylie, spoke to British lawmakers on Tuesday and revealed that an employee of Palantir Technologies had suggested that Cambridge Analytica build an app to gain access to Facebook networks. Palantir was co-founded by Peter Thiel, who sits on the Facebook board.Separately, New Zealand’s privacy commissioner has accused Facebook of breaking a law by refusing to give a man information about him held in other users’ accounts. Fair housing groups are suing over ad targeting, saying Facebook still lets advertisers discriminate. And three Facebook Messenger users are suing on privacy grounds.Nvidia — the chip maker whose autonomous-vehicle technology is used by Volkswagen, Tesla, Audi and hundreds of other firms — said it would halt its own tests on self-driving cars, after an autonomous Uber vehicle struck and killed a pedestrian in Arizona. Its shares dropped 7.8 percent.Here’s Roger Lanctot, an automotive technology analyst with Strategy Analytics:Tesla also tumbled 8.2 percent, after the National Transportation Safety Board said it was conducting its second crash investigation of the year involving one of the company’s cars. There’s also anxiety about whether it will hit production goals.Uber said it would not renew its California permit for self-driving vehicle tests until investigations were complete in Arizona. And it’s facing questions over a decision to scale back on safety sensors.But Waymo said it still intended to put thousands of self-driving cars — customized Jaguar I-Paces, to be precise — on the road over the next two years.Critic’s corner: Timothy B. Lee argues in Ars Technica that Uber should sell its self-driving project, which needed a firm with a “methodical, safety-oriented culture.”The tech flyaround• Uber has settled a discrimination lawsuit from three female software engineers for $10 million. (Recode)• Ransomware has hobbled the city government in Atlanta. (NYT)• Apple unveiled a new iPad aimed at classrooms, where Google has raced ahead. (NYT)• Oracle won a federal appeal in its multibillion-dollar copyright infringement claim against Google, in a way that could make software developers easier to sue. (WSJ)• Google bought the GIF platform Tenor. (Verge)• Snapchat is building a way for people to use their account with third-party apps, Facebook-style. (Recode)• Robert Mercer, of Renaissance and Cambridge Analytica fame, is also a volunteer police officer in Lake Arthur, N.M. (Bloomberg)• The former Supreme Court justice John Paul Stevens has called for the Second Amendment to be repealed, in an NYT Op-Ed. Bloomberg looked at how the bankruptcy of the gun maker Remington Outdoor would affect the people suing it for as much as $500 million. And the N.R.A. said it accepted funds from foreign sources, but did not spend them on election campaigns.• At least 12 states say they would sue if the Trump administration seeks to add a question about citizenship to the 2020 census. A less accurate census — if, say, fewer immigrants were to respond — could distort both government spending and the House of Representatives.• The F.B.I. found continuing ties between Russian intelligence and a business associate of the former Trump campaign manager Paul Manafort, according to court documents filed by the special counsel’s team. (WaPo)• A Republican plan for the midterm elections: more tax cuts. (Politico)The $200 billion solar power project would be the largest in the world and could help Saudi Arabia lessen its dependence on oil.But Jenny Chase, head of solar analysis at BNEF, told Bloomberg: “It is worth noting that many of these memorandums of understanding do not result in anything happening.”Saudi officials were in New York as part of a tour by Prince Mohammed bin Salman of Saudi Arabia, who spoke to the NYT, urging a tough line on Iran. And Saudi Arabia’s sovereign wealth fund said it was considering opening offices around the world.Deals flyaround• Takeda Pharmaceutical said it was considering a bid for Shire that could improve its position in drugs for cancer, gastrointestinal disease and nervous system ailments. (Bloomberg)• Potential bidders for GlaxoSmithKline’s health nutrition business could include Nestlé, Kraft Heinz and Unilever, unnamed sources say. (Reuters)• The real estate broker Cushman & Wakefield is interviewing I.P.O. advisers, unnamed sources say. (Bloomberg)• Tyson Foods has hired Goldman Sachs to explore the sale of its pizza crust business. (FT)• In a cross-examination during their big merger case, the lead lawyer for AT&T and Time Warner pushed back against the description of Time Warner’s content as “must-have.” (CNN)• The Carolina Panthers football team could fetch a record sale price of about $2.5 billion. (NYT)Books are on hold and deals are being canceled as the publishing sector grapples with accusations of sexual harassment by authors and others.But the response has not been universal, as publishers weigh lost profits against reputational risks in an industry dominated by women.Separately, former employees at Wynn Resorts said that managers had for years ignored or dismissed complaints about Steve Wynn’s conduct toward women. A former Miramax employee appeared before British lawmakers today to seek a change in the law on nondisclosure agreements.• The chief executive of Deutsche Bank, whoever it is, will face a challenge regaining investors’ trust: its share price is less than 40 percent of the net worth stated on its balance sheet and it relies a lot on potentially unpredictable Wall Street revenue.• Wu Xiaihui, former chairman of the Chinese insurer Anbang, went on trial in Shanghai. (FT)• A key player at the birth of Berkshire Hathaway’s health venture with Amazon and JPMorgan: the Berkshire investment manager Todd Combs. (Bloomberg)• The former Lloyds Banking Group chief Eric Daniels has won a legal battle over a bonus worth $2.1 million. It was withheld from him after the bank needed a government bailout. (Times of London)• Netflix’s talent hunting is pushing up Hollywood salaries. (Bloomberg)• How much would a Warren Buffett investment help G.E.? (Bloomberg Gadfly)Know someone who would enjoy this newsletter? Tell them to sign up here.You can find live updates throughout the day at nytimes.com/dealbook.We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bizday@nytimes.com.SAN FRANCISCO — Facebook employees were in an uproar on Friday over a leaked 2016 memo from a top executive defending the social network’s growth at any cost — even if it caused deaths from a terrorist attack that was organized on the platform.In the memo, Andrew Bosworth, a Facebook vice president, wrote, “Maybe someone dies in a terrorist attack coordinated on our tools. And still we connect people. The ugly truth is that we believe in connecting people so deeply that anything that allows us to connect more people more often is *de facto* good.”Mr. Bosworth and Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, have since disavowed the memo, which was published on Thursday by BuzzFeed News.But the fallout at the Silicon Valley company has been wide. According to two Facebook employees, workers have been calling on internal message boards for a hunt to find those who leak to the media. Some have questioned whether Facebook has been transparent enough with its users and with journalists, said the employees, who asked not to be identified for fear of retaliation. Many are also concerned over what might leak next and are deleting old comments or messages that might come across as controversial or newsworthy, they said.The brouhaha follows a period of intense scrutiny for Facebook and questions over what its responsibilities are to its more than 2.2 billion users. The company has been grappling this month with revelations that a British political consulting firm, Cambridge Analytica, improperly harvested data from 50 million of the social network’s users. Mr. Zuckerberg has since been on an apology tour over data privacy and is expected to testify before lawmakers in Washington.Facebook did not respond to a request for comment over employees’ reaction to the leaked memo.In the aftermath, some Facebook executives have taken to Twitter for a public charm offensive, sending pithy phrases and emoticons to reporters who cover the company. Adam Mosseri, Facebook’s head of news feed, in recent days wrote unprompted to a BuzzFeed editor and to its chief executive reminiscing and telling a story about his mother. He also wrote to a reporter from the Verge tech site about the songs played at his wedding reception.In some of his tweets, Mr. Mosseri also defended Facebook. When writers from Vox and BuzzFeed tweeted that they noticed that stories critical of Facebook were receiving surprisingly low levels of traffic on Facebook, Mr. Mosseri jumped in.“We 100% do not take any action on stories for being critical of us,” he tweeted.Mr. Bosworth, the author of the 2016 memo, also took to Twitter. Late Thursday, he said he did not agree with what he wrote in the memo “and I didn’t agree with it even when I wrote it.” He added that “the purpose of this post, like many others I have written internally, was to bring to the surface issues I felt deserved more discussion with the broader company.”After BuzzFeed published the memo, Mr. Bosworth deleted it from an internal message board where it had originally been posted. In a statement to BuzzFeed, Mr. Zuckerberg praised Mr. Bosworth as “a talented leader who says many provocative things” and said that he and most people at Facebook did not agree with the memo and that the company had realized that it could not just be about connecting people.Facebook employees said on Friday that discussions were raging across the company regarding the merits of the post. Some called for executives to aggressively pursue action against those leaking to the media, said two Facebook employees, as well as for the company to do more to screen for potential whistle-blowers during the hiring process.At least one former Facebook employee, Alec Muffett, wrote on Twitter that Mr. Bosworth’s memo was responsible for his decision to leave the company.“Between overwork and leadership direction evidenced thusly, I could never stay,” wrote Mr. Muffett, who formerly worked as a Facebook engineer.“There are some amazing engineers working at Facebook, folks who care deeply about user privacy, security, and how people will use the code that they write,” Mr. Muffett said later in a message. “Alas this episode may not help” to achieve more transparent internal product discussion, he said.Eric H. Holder Jr., the United States attorney general for six years under President Barack Obama, stepped away from public service in 2015 but has since emerged as a bulwark against the Trump administration, taking a leading role in challenging the president’s policies in court and trying to chip away at the Republicans’ grip on state governments. Mr. Holder discussed his efforts to fight Republican gerrymandering, whether Facebook should be regulated and the potential legacy of Mr. Trump’s presidency in a wide-ranging TimesTalks conversation with the reporter Alexander Burns on Wednesday night in New York.Here are the takeaways.After the Trump administration announced this week that it would add a question about citizenship to the 2020 census, Mr. Holder said he planned to sue to block the change on behalf of the National Democratic Redistricting Committee, which he chairs. The census aims to count everyone who resides in the country, whether they are citizens or not, and Mr. Holder echoed the concerns expressed by several states this week that the citizenship question could reduce the responses from noncitizens and even legal immigrants.He said his lawsuit would be aided by Mr. Trump’s Twitter utterances.“This is one of those incidences where I think the president’s tweets and public statements will become relevant,” Mr. Holder, 67, said. “To show the true intent — that it is not as benign as they would make it out to be. Through the words of Donald Trump and through the tweets of Donald Trump, you’ll see what the true intention was of the administration.”Normally, he noted, it would be difficult to argue in court that the government pushed a policy with a malicious intent. But Mr. Trump’s tweets provide plenty of material for lawsuits, Mr. Holder said.“It is certainly the gift that keeps on giving,” he said.Mr. Holder conceded that he prefers Twitter to Facebook but occasionally catches a glimpse of Facebook when his wife signs on. But he said he had been following the recent news that a British political consulting firm, Cambridge Analytica, improperly harvested the information of 50 million Facebook users.That security breach, along with the social network’s role in spreading Russian-backed propaganda during the presidential election, bolstered an argument for regulating Facebook, Mr. Holder said.“There needs to be a certain degree of freedom,” he said. “We don’t want to stifle the creativity that comes from those platforms.”But he added: “There is a way in which we have to think of these platforms as communication companies. What then does that mean in terms of how they should be regulated?”Mr. Holder, who served as the attorney general from February 2009 to April 2015, said he was stunned by the support Mr. Trump still enjoyed in some circles after a pornographic-film star and a former Playboy model claimed they had sexual relationships with him.“I find it hard to believe the conversations that we have about the conduct of this president. They are mind-blowing,” he said. “I think to myself, You gave my guy grief because he wore a tan suit.”Mr. Holder said that if the same allegations of extramarital affairs had been made against Mr. Obama or President George W. Bush, their presidencies would have been over. “I just don’t understand how this has not had the reaction generated that would have been generated by any other president,” he said.Mr. Trump has nominated Mike Pompeo, the director of the C.I.A., to be the next secretary of state and named a veteran of the spy agency, Gina Haspel, as the next director. Both nominations require Senate confirmation, and Ms. Haspel will certainly face questions about her work as a clandestine officer in the agency’s counterterrorism operations. She oversaw a secret prison in Thailand involved in the rendition, detention and interrogation of detainees.In 2012, Mr. Holder effectively closed that dark chapter in the C.I.A.’s history, announcing that a three-year Justice Department investigation into brutal interrogations was ending without a prosecution. The decision outraged some liberals.On Wednesday night, Mr. Holder said that Ms. Haspel would have to answer tough questions — and that the public deserved to know more about the country’s enhanced interrogation program. He said that parts of the Justice Department report and a separate Senate investigation into the program should be declassified.“The American people need to know exactly what happened during that time period,” he said.Responding to recent calls for a repeal of the Second Amendment, Mr. Holder said such an effort was impracticable but offered four suggestions to address what he called a “gun violence epidemic in the United States.” His remarks came days after John Paul Stevens, a retired associate justice of the United States Supreme Court, wrote an Op-Ed in The Times advocating repeal.Assault weapons should be banned, as well as higher-capacity magazines, Mr. Holder said. Background checks should be expanded for prospective gun buyers, and the government should reinstate the funding of studies on gun violence by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.“Compare us to any other nation, and we are just off the charts when it comes to mass shootings and the number of people killed through the use of firearms,” Mr. Holder said. “We have to do something about it.” (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• During five trips to Iraq, Times journalists scoured former offices of the Islamic State, gathering more than 15,000 pages of documents abandoned by the militants as their “caliphate” crumbled.We’ve just published the results of our yearlong investigation. It shows that ISIS, known for its brutality, was also effective at wielding power through paperwork. Here’s a closer look at some of the documents we collected, including tax collection forms, religious edicts and the will of a suicide bomber.We also have a new audio series, “Caliphate,” which follows our reporter Rukmini Callimachi as she covers the Islamic State and the fall of Mosul, Iraq. Listen to a preview here.• Separately, President Trump wants to bring home the 2,000 U.S. troops in Syria. He dropped plans for an immediate withdrawal, but instructed military commanders to wrap up the mission within a few months.• The latest dispute between the U.S. and China has been defined by reciprocity, with each side announcing matching tariffs.But if things continue to escalate, Beijing will have less room to maneuver and could resort to more unconventional measures, our senior economics correspondent writes.For now, the White House is trying to calm fears of a possible trade war. Administration officials hinted on Wednesday that tariffs outlined earlier in the week might never go into effect, but reiterated that China must stop what President Trump calls unfair trading practices.• Here’s how the showdown could affect U.S. manufacturers.• Our correspondent in Mexico spoke with some of the Central American migrants cited by President Trump to justify sending troops to the southern border. (The caravans have also excited the conservative news media.)The group of more than 1,000 people, mostly women and children, is fleeing violence and poverty, but its members face an uncertain future. “Who wants to leave their country, the comfort of their home, their families?” one asked.• White House officials confirmed plans on Wednesday to mobilize the National Guard to the border with Mexico, but gave few details about timing, the number of troops or their mission there.• The country’s top court ruled today that former President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva can be sent to prison while he appeals his conviction on corruption and money laundering charges.Mr. da Silva, 72, who was president from 2003 to 2011, was sentenced last year to almost 10 years in prison. His chosen successor, Dilma Rousseff, was removed from office in 2016.• Mr. da Silva is the front-runner in the presidential election in October, and the court’s decision raises questions about the legitimacy of the vote.• Facebook said that the data of up to 87 million users may have been improperly shared with a political consulting firm, far more than an earlier estimate of 50 million.The company’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, is scheduled to testify to Congress next week. Here’s a guide to our coverage of the Cambridge Analytica story.• Thousands of Google employees are urging their chief executive to end the company’s involvement in a Pentagon program to improve the targeting of drone strikes.• “You can’t be serious!” That was the response of Sinclair Broadcast Group’s chairman to criticism of a script about media bias that dozens of TV anchors at its stations were instructed to read out.• The former Fox News host Bill O’Reilly and his lawyers worked hard to silence the women who accused him of sexual harassment. Now a judge has made the settlements public.• U.S. stocks were up on Wednesday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets today.Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• Flying somewhere? Take advantage of the changes at airports.• How to respond when a colleague is harassing women.• Recipe of the day: Take a break from the usual stir fry, with braised eggplant, pork and mushrooms.Our journalists recommend these great pieces:• Cambridge Analytica’s parent company apparently helped Rodrigo Duterte win the Philippine presidential election, our former Europe Morning Briefing writer, Patrick Boehler, noted on Twitter. [South China Morning Post]• “As a onetime employee of Blockbuster Video, I was tickled to learn that a video store in Bend, Ore., is still operating under the name of the chain.“It’s the last one in the lower 48 states (there are six others in Alaska), and how they continue to do business is fascinating.” [GeekWire]— Michael Roston, senior staff editor, Science• Putting out a yearbook after a school shootingAfter the deadly attack at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High in February, the staff of the Aerie, the school’s yearbook, had to decide how to honor the 17 people who died.“This has to be remembered for the rest of our lives,” one of the yearbook’s editors told our reporter.• Best sellers, via the Oval OfficePresidents past, present and future are represented on the latest hardcover nonfiction best-seller list.It includes a collection of Obama-era photographs, an inside account of the Trump White House, a book about the meaning of faith by former President Jimmy Carter, and an open letter to whoever becomes the first female president.• Are you a teacher?We want to hear from you. Tell us what you think about the protests over pay and benefits, and what conditions are like at your school.• Best of late-night TVMike Myers — in the form of his “Austin Powers” character Dr. Evil — told Jimmy Fallon that the wall between the U.S. and Mexico was actually his idea. Except, “I wanted it to be a moat, filled with spiky blowfish.”• Quotation of the day“Tariffs are seen as a direct slap in the face, and it will be very difficult for the Chinese government to sit back and take those blows without retaliating.”— Eswar Prasad, a professor of international trade at Cornell University, on the risk of a full-blown trade war between the U.S. and China.• The Times, in other wordsHere’s an image of today’s front page, and links to our Opinion content and crossword puzzles.We begin today with a shimmy, or maybe the turkey trot. Perhaps the bunny hug is more your style.Arthur Murray, an immigrant baker’s son who brought ballroom dancing into people’s living rooms, was born this week in 1895. His mission, he said, was to use dance to “bring ease for universal heartache, loneliness and desolation.”As a tall, gangly boy from the Bronx, he discovered in high school that he had a flair for dancing and threw himself into the ballroom dance craze of the early 20th century.He worked in an architecture firm by day and taught lessons by night. He eventually turned the lessons into a lucrative mail order magazine business and dance studio franchises around the world.Mr. Murray’s unique method was influenced by his time in design — clearly drawn diagrams of footprints instructed students how and where to move their feet.He also took advantage of regular radio programming, and he had a weekly variety TV program, “The Arthur Murray Party.” That way, anyone could dance with Mr. Murray, anywhere.For Mr. Murray, who died in 1991, a bad dancer never blames his partner.“To find fault with your partner’s dancing,” he  once said, “is the best way of advertising the fact that you are just learning to dance.”Remy Tumin contributed reporting._____Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays and updated all morning. Browse past briefings here.Sign up here to get it by email in the Australian, Asian, European or American morning. To receive an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights, sign up here.Check out our full range of free newsletters here.What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.WEYMOUTH, Mass. — Kyle Corkum imagines a “smart city” with futuristic amenities like driverless shuttle services, heated sidewalks and a super-resilient energy grid that keeps humming through the harshest of storms.As chief executive of LStar Ventures, a developer of planned communities, he has a chance to build the neighborhood of his dreams from the ground up on the site of a long-shuttered naval air station in this town just 12 miles south of Boston’s booming technology hub.LStar, based in Raleigh, N.C., has enlisted General Electric as its partner. Because they are starting from scratch, Mr. Corkum said, the companies can embed smart technology into the energy, water, lighting and transportation systems that will serve the community.The project comes at a time when the tech industry is under intense scrutiny. Facebook is struggling with revelations that Cambridge Analytica, a political data firm, improperly harvested private information from 50 million of the social network’s users. And Uber’s travails include a pedestrian death caused by one of its autonomous vehicles last month.Still, LStar is pushing ahead with the smart city, called Union Point. Plans include thousands of housing units and millions of square feet of high-tech commercial space on about 1,500 acres that extend into the neighboring towns of Rockland and Abington. The community’s glass towers, public plazas, clustered housing, scattered parks and retail zones will be contained within 500 acres, leaving the rest as dedicated open space.So far, the community consists of about 1,200 occupied single-family homes, townhouses and apartments, as well as a nearly completed $28 million sports complex with a miniature replica of Fenway Park. A cavernous aircraft hangar will be renovated for use as the centerpiece for a downtown district with shops, restaurants and open spaces with public programming.General Electric will use Union Point as a laboratory for testing new products and as a showroom for working systems. Eric Gebhardt, the strategic technology officer at GE Power, said the community’s energy plan will include micro grid technology, renewable generation and power storage. The company will also install “intelligent” lighting — streetlights with sensors that can track sound, light and other conditions. The data can be used to monitor traffic, help drivers find parking spaces and alert law enforcement if a gun is fired.G.E. has piloted some of its smart products in existing cities, but Union Point is an unusual opportunity because most of the infrastructure does not exist yet and the developer is open to experimentation, Mr. Gebhardt said.LStar plans to open an innovation center in the air station’s old power plant. The center has expressed an interest in featuring an interactive planning tool developed by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology City Science Group called CityScope, which could aid in Union Point’s evolution by allowing users to visualize and explore trade-offs around factors like density, transportation and walkability, said David Rose, a researcher and lecturer at MIT’s Media Lab.LStar wants “the center to be a showcase for what the city could be, a place to monitor what it is becoming, and a place to ask existential questions like, ‘Could it be more inclusive, say, or energy efficient?’” Mr. Rose said.LStar also has an agreement with Optimus Ride, an autonomous vehicle start-up in Boston, to set up a self-driving vehicle service at Union Point. The company is already testing its electric vehicles at the property.Union Point’s first commercial tenant is expected this spring, when Prodrive Technologies, a Dutch company that develops and manufactures products for the automotive, medical and other industries, will break ground on its 60,000-square-foot United States headquarters. The site’s proximity to Boston, access to commuter rail service and ample room for expansion were crucial to the firm’s location decision, said Roy Willems, the company’s general manager of United States operations. He said Prodrive expected to build a second 200,000-square-foot building within three years, and increase its work force to roughly 300 people.LStar had to persuade the three host communities to approve critical zoning changes before it could move forward with the project. They also granted the developer considerable latitude over the design and layout of the community, which will take shape over 15 to 20 years.“The three towns recognized an opportunity to do something quite extraordinary” on a site where previous development plans stalled, said David P. Manfredi, a founding principal at Elkus Manfredi Architects, which helped create the master plan for Union Point. “This is an alternative to what could have been suburban sprawl.”Union Point promises to bring badly needed tax revenue to Weymouth, said the town’s mayor, Robert L. Hedlund. “It’s the commercial build-out that we’re lusting after,” he said.Still, similarly ambitious smart city projects have proved perilous. Mr. Rose cited Songdo, a smart city nearing completion in South Korea, as a prime example. The city boasts advanced connectivity, but it has so far failed to meet expectations in attracting international businesses and residents.“What they got wrong was any sort of sense of streetscape,” said Mr. Rose, who has visited Songdo. “There’s no sense of patina, no authentic street life. It’s super sterile. It was built as this fantasy of the future, but it’s a place that humans don’t want to occupy.”The integration of technology into urban planning has prompted questions about how the data being collected will be used. In Toronto, for example, Sidewalk Labs, a subsidiary of Alphabet, the parent company of Google, attracted considerable publicity when it was selected last year to help create a smart neighborhood of sorts in a waterfront district called Quayside. Some local officials and critics are questioning whether the deal gives too much authority to Sidewalk Labs without putting limitations on Google’s collection and use of data.The need for greater regulation of driverless vehicles has also come up for debate after the death last month of a woman who was struck by one of Uber’s self-driving cars in Tempe, Ariz.“Very few local governments have thought through the long list of public- and private-sector values and concerns that should be deployed to constrain” the use of autonomous cars, as well as the technologies being used to monitor city streets, said Susan Crawford, a Harvard Law School professor. “Once you’ve given a developer license to deploy total surveillance, with no public limitations, you’re done.”LStar has considerable leeway to test technologies at Union Point. The developer is purposely holding on to its roads, rather than asking for them to be made public ways, to maintain flexibility in testing autonomous vehicles, lighting and other technologies, said Robert Luongo, Weymouth’s director of planning and community development.“If these were public ways, we might not be able to give them that flexibility,” he said.Mr. Corkum said retaining ownership of the roads would enable them to play with designs for amenities like drop-off areas for driverless shuttles and heated sidewalks. “It’s better for us to stay in this testing phase until we have good workable solutions,” he said.State oversight of autonomous vehicles applies only once there is public use, he said. Even then, the rules are vague. Ryan Chin, the chief executive of Optimus Ride, said his company would adhere to the same high-level safety standards and testing protocols at Union Point that it followed for testing driverless cars in Boston’s Seaport neighborhood.As for privacy concerns, Mr. Corkum said that he believed in setting boundaries on data collection and use. There is value in using technology to improve quality of life by, for instance, alleviating traffic jams, but he said he was wary of falling prey to a “preoccupation with optimization.”The company is working with law firms and consultants on operating guidelines for gathering and anonymizing data and ensuring it cannot be hacked or used to invade privacy, he said.“I don’t like the Big Brother notion that we know everything about you,” he said. “We will use data for the benefit of the group, not in a way to leverage the group.”SAN FRANCISCO — Ryan Knight, a Democratic activist in Los Angeles, called for a boycott of Apple in February because it hadn’t responded to calls to delete a channel from the National Rifle Association from its streaming-video service after the Parkland, Fla., school shooting.“Dear @Apple,” Mr. Knight wrote on Twitter. “Your silence is deafening. #BoycottApple.” More than 330 accounts retweeted the message.How did Mr. Knight post the message? He used an iPhone.As the reach and influence of Silicon Valley’s tech giants have increased, so have the calls to boycott their products and services. The problem is that pulling off a boycott is not exactly easy: The tech companies’ products are so pervasive that they are difficult to avoid.That issue was crystallized in recent weeks with Facebook. Hundreds of people deleted their accounts after revelations that the political-data firm Cambridge Analytica had improperly harvested the information of 50 million Facebook users. Yet many of those same people promptly instructed their friends to find them on Instagram, which is owned by — you guessed it — Facebook.“It’s exactly the same company. I realize it’s ridiculous,” said Sachi Cunningham, a documentary filmmaker in San Francisco who deactivated her Facebook last week and shifted her attention to Instagram, where, she said, the conversation is less toxic.Ms. Cunningham, who has freelanced for The New York Times, added that she had immediately begun missing Facebook as a research tool for her documentaries. “I don’t know if I can get out of the ecosystem,” she said.People looking to punish major tech companies by abstaining from their products have been bedeviled time and again by the difficulty in escaping them. After Google fired an engineer, James Damore, for criticizing the company’s diversity efforts last year, hundreds of people on social media called for a boycott of the company. But an analysis of nearly 7,000 tweets using the hashtag #BoycottGoogle since August showed that 26 percent of the tweets came from devices using Google’s Android software, according to Keyhole, a social-media research firm.One Twitter account named Milton Prescott tweeted on Aug. 8: “Google’s firing of James Damore proves his point completely. I will no longer be using Google for any services. #BoycottGoogle.” The tweet came from an Android device. A message to the account went unreturned.Even Breitbart is running into the same dilemma. The conservative website is planning to host a panel on how tech platforms like Facebook suppress conservative voices — and it said it would livestream the discussion on Facebook. Breitbart didn’t respond to a request for comment.Marisa Richardson, a program manager at a life-sciences company, said she began boycotting Amazon recently after learning that it offered the NRA channel on its streaming-video service. So when she needed laundry detergent, she avoided the e-commerce site and instead braved the crowds and traffic — and spent a few dollars more — at a nearby Target.But a few days later she shopped at the Whole Foods near her home in Oakland, Calif. “I completely forgot that they’re owned by Amazon,” she said.After the shooting in Parkland in February, gun-control activists called for a boycott of certain Apple and Amazon services because they hosted the NRA channel.People used the hashtag #March1NRABoycott to spread the message on social media. An analysis of about 58,500 tweets with the hashtag showed that nearly half came from an iPhone or an iPad, according to Keyhole. Those included popular tweets using the #March1NRABoycott hashtag from the actress Alyssa Milano.“Had I sent the same tweets from an Android phone, the same issue would apply. There is an NRATV app for Android phones,” Ms. Milano said through a spokeswoman. “We are only just beginning to understand how these companies have infiltrated not only our ideologies, but also our lives in the most in-depth way imaginable.”Nearly a third of the 4,700 tweets using the #BoycottApple hashtag since August came from iPhones, according to Keyhole.“I do have an iPhone, but as a customer of Apple’s, am I not allowed to hold them accountable?” Mr. Knight, the activist who used an iPhone to call for an Apple boycott, said in an interview.Eddy Cue, a senior executive at Apple, recently said that the NRA channel didn’t violate the company’s policies. Facebook, Google and Amazon didn’t respond to requests for comment.Many of those who recently abandoned their Facebook accounts are still in the company’s orbit, not only with Instagram but also with the company’s popular messaging apps WhatsApp and Messenger.When Cher recently deleted her Facebook page, she said on Twitter, “2day I did something VERY HARD 4 me.” But her Instagram account, with 768,000 followers, was still active.Likewise, Elon Musk, chief executive of SpaceX and Tesla, deleted the Facebook pages of both companies — but left their pages and his personal account active on Instagram. The photo-sharing platform, he said on Twitter, is fine “so long as it stays fairly independent.”Stephen Cox, 39, a woodworker in Los Angeles, recently posted on Facebook that he was deactivating his account in favor of Instagram. When someone commented that the two sites were owned by the same company, he replied, “It’s a double-edged sword, but for me one edge is slightly more blunt than the other.”Instagram has proved an effective hedge for Facebook against people losing interest or trust in its main site. While the percentage of American adults who use Facebook has remained flat at 68 percent since 2016, according to a January survey of 2,002 American adults by the Pew Research Center, Instagram use rose to 35 percent from 28 percent over that period. Instagram is also more popular with younger people than older people, according to the survey.Rayven Bruzzese, 26, a sign-language student in Philadelphia, said she had been a frequent user of Facebook for years but deleted her account in March because she found it upsetting and a drain on her time. Now she spends her time on Instagram.While she acknowledged the irony of moving to another Facebook-owned service, she said her options were limited. Few of her friends are on Twitter, and many have stopped using Snapchat.“Where am I supposed to go?” she said. “I wish there was something else.”Amazon ran a commercial on this year’s Super Bowl that pretended its digital assistant Alexa had temporarily lost her voice. It featured celebrities like Rebel Wilson, Cardi B and even the company’s chief executive, Jeff Bezos.While the ad riffed on what Alexa can say to users, the more intriguing question may be what she and other digital assistants can hear — especially as more people bring smart speakers into their homes.Amazon and Google, the leading sellers of such devices, say the assistants record and process audio only after users trigger them by pushing a button or uttering a phrase like “Hey, Alexa” or “O.K., Google.” But each company has filed patent applications, many of them still under consideration, that outline an array of possibilities for how devices like these could monitor more of what users say and do. That information could then be used to identify a person’s desires or interests, which could be mined for ads and product recommendations.In one set of patent applications, Amazon describes how a “voice sniffer algorithm” could be used on an array of devices, like tablets and e-book readers, to analyze audio almost in real time when it hears words like “love,” bought” or “dislike.” A diagram included with the application illustrated how a phone call between two friends could result in one receiving an offer for the San Diego Zoo and the other seeing an ad for a Wine of the Month Club membership.Some patent applications from Google, which also owns the smart home product maker Nest Labs, describe how audio and visual signals could be used in the context of elaborate smart home setups.One application details how audio monitoring could help detect that a child is engaging in “mischief” at home by first using speech patterns and pitch to identify a child’s presence, one filing said. A device could then try to sense movement while listening for whispers or silence, and even program a smart speaker to “provide a verbal warning.”A separate application regarding personalizing content for people while respecting their privacy noted that voices could be used to determine a speaker’s mood using the “volume of the user’s voice, detected breathing rate, crying and so forth,” and medical condition “based on detected coughing, sneezing and so forth.”The same application outlines how a device could “recognize a T-shirt on a floor of the user’s closet” bearing Will Smith’s face and combine that with a browser history that shows searches for Mr. Smith “to provide a movie recommendation that displays, ‘You seem to like Will Smith. His new movie is playing in a theater near you.’”In a statement, Amazon said the company took “privacy seriously” and did “not use customers’ voice recordings for targeted advertising.” Amazon said that it filed “a number of forward-looking patent applications that explore the full possibilities of new technology,” and that they “take multiple years to receive and do not necessarily reflect current developments to products and services.”Google said it did not “use raw audio to extrapolate moods, medical conditions or demographic information.” The company added, “All devices that come with the Google Assistant, including Google Home, are designed with user privacy in mind.”Tech companies apply for a dizzying number of patents every year, many of which are never used and are years from even being possible.Still, Jamie Court, the president of Consumer Watchdog, a nonprofit advocacy group in Santa Monica, Calif., which published a study of some of the patent applications in December, said, “When you read parts of the applications, it’s really clear that this is spyware and a surveillance system meant to serve you up to advertisers.”The companies, Mr. Court added, are “basically going to be finding out what our home life is like in qualitative ways.”Google called Consumer Watchdog’s claims “unfounded,” and said, “Prospective product announcements should not necessarily be inferred from our patent applications.”A recent Gallup poll found that 22 percent of Americans used devices like Google Home or Amazon Echo. The growing adoption of smart speakers means that gadgets, some of which contain up to eight microphones and a camera, are being placed in kitchens and bedrooms and used to answer questions, control appliances and make phone calls. Apple recently introduced its own version, called the HomePod.But many consumers are also becoming increasingly nervous that tech companies are eavesdropping on them in order to serve them targeted ads, no matter how often the companies deny it. The recent revelations that a British political data firm, Cambridge Analytica, improperly harvested the information of 50 million Facebook users has only added to the public’s wariness over the collection and use of personal information.Facebook, in fact, had planned to unveil its new internet-connected home products at a developer conference in May, according to Bloomberg News, which reported that the company had scuttled that idea partly in response to the recent fallout.Both Amazon and Google have emphasized that devices with Alexa and Google Assistant store voice recordings from users only after they are intentionally triggered. Amazon’s Echo and its newer smart speakers with screens use lights to show when they are streaming audio to the cloud, and consumers can view and delete their recordings on the Alexa smartphone app or on Amazon’s website (though they are warned online that “may degrade” their experience). Google Home also has a light that indicates when it is recording, and users can similarly see and delete that audio online.Amazon says voice recordings may help fulfill requests and improve its services, while Google says the data helps it learn over time to provide better, more personalized responses.But the ecosystem around voice data is still evolving.Take the thousands of third-party apps developed for Alexa called “skills,” which can be used to play games, dim lights or provide cleaning advice. While Amazon said it didn’t share users’ actual recordings with third parties, its terms of use for Alexa say it may share the content of their requests or information like their ZIP codes. Google says  it will “generally” not provide audio recordings to third-party service providers, but may send transcriptions of what people say.And some devices have already shown that they are capable of recording more than what users expect. Google faced some embarrassment last fall when a batch of Google Home Minis that it distributed at company events and to journalists were almost constantly recording.In a starker example, detectives investigating a death at an Arkansas home sought access to audio on an Echo device in 2016. Amazon resisted, but the recordings were ultimately shared with the permission of the defendant, James Bates. (A judge later dismissed Mr. Bates’s first-degree murder charge based on separate evidence.)Kathleen Zellner, his lawyer, said in an interview that the Echo had been recording more than it was supposed to. Mr. Bates told her that it had been regularly lighting up without being prompted, and had logged conversations that were unrelated to Alexa commands, including a conversation about football in a separate room, she said.“It was just extremely sloppy the way the activation occurred,” Ms. Zellner said.The Electronic Privacy Information Center has recommended more robust disclosure rules for internet-connected devices, including an “algorithmic transparency requirement” that would help people understand how their data was being used and what automated decisions were then being made about them.Sam Lester, the center’s consumer privacy fellow, said he believed that the abilities of new smart home devices highlighted the need for United States regulators to get more involved with how consumer data was collected and used.“A lot of these technological innovations can be very good for consumers,” he said. “But it’s not the responsibility of consumers to protect themselves from these products any more than it’s their responsibility to protect themselves from the safety risks in food and drugs. It’s why we established a Food and Drug Administration years ago.”(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning. Kim Jong-un’s power play, a French march against hate and a Balkan design facepalm. Here’s the latest:• Confident, reasonable — willing to bargain.That’s how North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, came across in his debut as a global statesman — and he did so with a dash of mystery. Here’s how the Chinese and the North Korean news media portrayed the meeting with President Xi Jinping.Mr. Kim’s two-day visit — his first known trip abroad since taking power — was a reminder of how much he has set the agenda in the North Korean nuclear crisis and, our correspondent writes, what a strong hand he has going into negotiations.President Trump was quick to chime in. He posted on Twitter that Mr. Xi told him that the meeting went “very well” and that Mr. Kim “looks forward to his meeting with me.”_____• “In France, we kill grandmothers because they’re Jewish.”Condemning anti-Semitic violence, thousands marched through Paris to honor Mireille Knoll, above, an 85-year-old Holocaust survivor who was murdered in her apartment last week.She was stabbed 11 times and partly burned, and a neighbor is one of the suspects. He reportedly said “God is great” in Arabic during the killing, which the authorities have labeled a hate crime, renewing concerns about a persistent strain of anti-Semitism in France._____• The British authorities said that a poisoned former Russian spy and his daughter, who are at the epicenter of a diplomatic crisis between Russia and the West, had been sickened by a nerve agent on the front door of his house, above, in the cathedral town of Salisbury, England.The announcement narrows the possibilities of how the victims came into contact with Novichok, a lethal toxin developed by Soviet scientists.Separately, outrage continues to mount in Russia as funerals began for the 64 victims of a deadly shopping mall fire in the Siberian city of Kemerovo._____• A lawyer for President Trump broached the idea of pardoning two of his former top advisers, Michael Flynn and Paul Manafort, with their attorneys last year, according to people with knowledge of the talks. But the lawyer, John Dowd, who resigned last week, denied it.Yet the special investigation into Mr. Trump’s ties to Russia continues to gain steam. The U.S. special counsel released a document showing that Rick Gates, a top Trump campaign official, had repeated communications with a business associate tied to Russian intelligence during the final weeks of the 2016 presidential election.Meanwhile, Mr. Trump has chosen his personal physician, Ronny L. Jackson, above, as the new secretary of veterans affairs, replacing David Shulkin. (Finding it hard to keep track of all the Trump administration turnover? Here’s a handy breakdown.)_____• A capital of kitsch. An ambitious building project in Skopje, the capital of Macedonia, was intended to evoke an ancient past.But $750 million, hundreds of new statues and three pirate ships later, the remodeling has become a cautionary tale of Balkan nationalism gone wild._____• Is your waiter rude, or just French?Few cultural stereotypes are more pervasive than the surly French garçon. That perception was even used as a defense in a recent wrongful termination suit in Canada.In the lawsuit, a French waiter who was fired for being combative and aggressive said his former bosses were discriminating against his culture and heritage. (Above, a waiter at a restaurant in Paris.)• Boeing was hit by a cyberattack that some executives say used the same ransomware that struck thousands of computer systems in more than 70 countries last year.• President Trump wants to remake global trade in a matter of months. Here’s how he’s trying to do it.• A top Morgan Stanley broker was repeatedly accused of violence against his ex-wives and girlfriends. Bank managers were told. But he kept his job.• Facebook will introduce a centralized system for its users to control their privacy and security settings in response to an outcry over the way it has handled personal data.• An advertising group that gave Cambridge Analytica a gold prize for its work for the Trump campaign is now urging marketers to reconsider the ethics of how consumer information is collected. (It has yet to rescind the award.)• Saudi Arabia may be changing, but the sudden postponement of its first fashion week suggests bumps in the road.• U.S. stocks were mixed. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.• In Egypt, it’s $3 a vote. With no real challenger in this week’s election, President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi is cajoling, coercing and even paying voters to ensure a credible turnout. Above, a woman with a photo of Mr. Sisi in Cairo. [The New York Times]• Ecuador  cut off internet access — again — for Julian Assange, who lives in the Ecuadorean Embassy in London. The government cited concerns that he was harming the country’s international relationships on social media. [The New York Times]• Just in time for summer, Ireland will be getting its first official nude beach. [BBC]• Immigration has helped bump Germany’s birthrate to its highest in decades. [Politico]• Pope Francis rejected calls to apologize for the Roman Catholic Church’s role in a Canadian school system that tried to eliminate Indigenous culture. Many native students were sexually and physically abused by priests and nuns. [The New York Times]Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• Recipe of the day: If you’re looking for big flavor, a chicken tagine is just what you need.• Being a wedding guest can get pricey. Here’s how to cut costs.• Have a tiny apartment? These are the best cleaning tools for a small space.• In Cambodia, ethnic Vietnamese live in floating villages, above, spread across the Mekong River, a symbol of their perpetually adrift status in Cambodian society.• An ancient guide: In Rome, you can actually map a 2,000-year-old eyewitness account of history onto the modern urban landscape.• In memoriam: Liam O’Flynn, 72, a master Irish piper who “could move your heart” with the most difficult instrument to play in the arsenal of Irish music.• A landmark ruling in Israel allows babies to be conceived from frozen embryos or sperm of people who have died. But is it ethical?On this day in 1961, the 23rd Amendment to the U.S. Constitution was approved by the required three-fourths of the states, giving Washingtonians the right to vote for president and vice president for the first time in more than 160 years.“The United States finally gave its capital the vote today,” The Times noted on its front page, with a hint of impatience.The amendment granted representation to the District of Columbia in the Electoral College, where states are given electors based on population. Although the District’s population (estimated around 700,000 in 2017) is larger than that of some states, it is given no more electors than the least populous state, which is currently Wyoming.At the time, the push to give the vote to the district, with its large African-American population, became caught up in the civil rights movement. The amendment was opposed in the South, where Tennessee was the only state to ratify it.Democrats have since been able to count on the district’s three electoral votes, which have been cast for each of the party’s presidential candidates, starting with Lyndon Johnson in 1964.Although the district’s residents have a say at the White House, they lack a full voice in Congress, where their representative does not have full voting rights.Chris Stanford contributed reporting._____Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.Check out this page to find a Morning Briefing for your region. (In addition to our European edition, we have Australian, Asian and U.S. editions.)Sign up here to receive an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights, and here’s our full range of free newsletters.What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning. Following the paper trail of ISIS, railing against Emmanuel Macron and relaxing with monkeys. Here’s the latest:• The ISIS files.On five trips to battle-scarred Iraq, New York Times journalists scoured old Islamic State offices in 11 cities and towns, gathering thousands of documents abandoned by the militants as their “caliphate” crumbled.Following a paper trail that led through booby-trapped streets near the front lines of battle, they found suicide bomber forms, birth certificates, tax records, school books teaching English words like “gun” and “martyr,” and papers from the Ministry of War Spoils. (Here’s a closer look at the documents.)The records reveal how the terrorist group combined brutality and paperwork to wield power over territory that at one point was the size of Britain, with a population estimated at 12 million people.Above, papers littered a room in the bombed-out remnants of the Directorate of Agriculture in Mosul, Iraq, last September._____• Nearly 10 months after the deadly fire in Grenfell Tower, above, in London, many of the survivors left homeless are still living in limbo.While local officials have spent about $280 million on new housing, almost 100 displaced families remain in hotels and other temporary accommodations.The delays are adding to public fury over the disaster, which killed at least 71 people, and traumatized residents have accused the authorities of ignoring their needs._____• Millions of frustrated travelers.A rail strike in France is testing the limits of public anger as union workers face off against President Emmanuel Macron and his efforts to overhaul Europe’s second-largest economy — starting with cuts to their cherished job benefits.But whether French commuters, including those above in Paris on Tuesday, blame the union or Mr. Macron is the big question._____• Last month, we visited a charity food bank in the German city of Essen that had decided to turn away migrants, a move that set off a national debate about refugees and poverty.But now, non-Germans will be welcome once again, after the pantry agreed to give priority to older people and families with young children, regardless of nationality._____• A rapidly escalating trade confrontation.Hours after the White House outlined $50 billion in tariffs on largely high-tech Chinese products, China struck back.Its own proposed tariffs target $50 billion worth of soybeans, above, cars and other American goods. We look at the broad sectors of the U.S. economy under threat.Administration officials say they see no reason to panic — but markets appear unconvinced._____• Anger that YouTube was censoring her videos may have motivated the woman who shot three people on Tuesday at the company’s headquarters in San Bruno, Calif., and then killed herself.Nasim Najafi Aghdam, above, who was in her late 30s and living in California, was a social media star in Iran. Known there as Green Nasim, she posted music parodies and workouts, promoted vegan cooking and opposed animal cruelty. (We gathered some of her clips in this video, which our Tehran bureau chief narrates.)Some of her videos were apparently “demonetized” — deliberately starved of ads — by YouTube, which has been under pressure over offensive content._____• Japan’s famed snow monkeys have long been the picture of hot-springs bliss.Now, they’re also scientific subjects in a study of how stress hormones affect social structure.The long soaks bring their stress levels down. And higher-ranking females spent more time in the pools.(Our video of the basking macaques is seriously fun.)_____• On Spotify’s first day of trading, Sony cashed in, selling 17 percent of its stake in the streaming platform for more than $250 million.• Thousands of Google employees signed a letter protesting the company’s role in a U.S. military program that uses artificial intelligence to interpret videos and could be used in drone strikes.• Facebook said the data of up to 87 million users may have been improperly shared with Cambridge Analytica, the consulting firm connected  to President Trump and the Brexit campaign, far higher than previously cited estimates. (Here’s how we covered the revelations that spurred an uproar on both sides of the Atlantic.)• Name and shame: Britain is hoping to narrow the pay gap by forcing companies to publicly air salary discrepancies between men and women. The government’s role model? Other Western countries, like Germany, Iceland and Australia.• And our Corner Office columnist speaks with Alexis Ohanian, a co-founder of Reddit. (Among the topics: Metallica and his new marriage to Serena Williams.)• U.S. stocks had a rough day, but closed higher. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.• The White House said the U.S. would remain in Syria to continue the fight against the Islamic State, a day after President Trump said he wanted to immediately bring the 2,000 U.S. troops there home. [The New York Times]• The Victoria and Albert Museum in London offered to return to Ethiopia treasures taken by British troops 150 years ago, but only as a loan. [The New York Times]• In The Hague, a jihadist fighter from Mali was brought before the International Criminal Court to face charges of rape, torture and sexual slavery. [The New York Times]• Austria’s new right-wing government has proposed a ban on head scarves in schools for girls under 10 years old. [BBC]• Skripal poisoning: Emboldened by a series of blunders by the British government, Russia will convene a special meeting of the U.N. Security Council in an attempt to undermine allegations that Moscow was behind the nerve agent attack against a former Russian spy. [The Guardian]Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• Do face masks really keep you healthy?• How to respond when a colleague is harassing women.• Recipe of the day: Take a break from the usual stir fry with braised eggplant, pork and mushrooms.• The British comedian and transgender activist Eddie Izzard has acted in Hollywood movies, run 43 marathons in 51 days (for charity) and campaigned against Brexit. Now for his next challenge: He’s joined the governing body of Britain’s Labour Party, just as it’s struggling to tackle an internal crisis over anti-Semitism.• Natural confusion: Global warming is causing spring to arrive early and autumn to come late in many places, and not all plants and animals are adapting at the same rate.• Scottish dinosaurs? Aye, say paleontologists who discovered dozens of giant-size footprints on the Isle of Skye. But don’t get too excited; the prints were left about 170 million years ago.We begin today with a shimmy, or maybe the turkey trot. Perhaps the bunny hug is more your style.Arthur Murray, an immigrant baker’s son who brought ballroom dancing into people’s living rooms, was born this week in 1895. With dance, Mr. Murray’s mission was, he said, to “bring ease for universal heartache, loneliness and desolation.”A tall, gangly kid from the Bronx, Mr. Murray discovered “he had a flair for ballroom dancing” in high school and threw himself into the ballroom dance craze of the early 20th century.He worked in an architecture firm by day and taught lessons by night, eventually turning the lessons into a lucrative mail order magazine business and dance studio franchises around the world.Mr. Murray’s unique method was influenced by his time in design — clearly drawn diagrams of footprints instructed students how and where to move their feet.He also took advantage of regular radio programming and had a weekly variety TV program with “The Arthur Murray Party.” Now, anyone could dance with Mr. Murray, anywhere.For Mr. Murray, who died in 1991, a bad dancer never blames his partner.“To find fault with your partner’s dancing,” Mr. Murray once said, “is the best way of advertising the fact that you are just learning to dance.”Remy Tumin contributed reporting._____Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.Check out this page to find a Morning Briefing for your region. (In addition to our European edition, we have Australian, Asian and U.S. editions.)Sign up here to receive an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights, and here’s our full range of free newsletters.What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning. • Confident, reasonable — willing to bargain.That’s how North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, came across in his debut as a global statesman — and he did so with a dash of mystery. Here’s how the Chinese and North Korean news media portrayed the meeting with President Xi Jinping.Mr. Kim’s two-day visit — his first trip abroad since taking power — was a reminder of how much he has set the agenda in the North Korean nuclear crisis and, our correspondent writes, what a strong hand he has going into negotiations.President Trump was quick to chime in. He posted on Twitter that Mr. Xi told him that the meeting went “very well” and that Mr. Kim “looks forward to his meeting with me.”_____• Beijing  adjusted the optics in other areas, too.One of China’s biggest financial crimes trials intensified when the founder of Anbang Insurance, Wu Xiaohui, pleaded not guilty to bilking investors out of more than $10 billion. The surprise plea raises the stakes in a prosecution meant to show Beijing’s determination to crack down on a recent borrowing binge.And in the coastal city of Xiamen, the Chinese authorities are trying to keep an underground bishop, Guo Xijin, out of the spotlight Easter weekend. Bishop Guo is at the center of a deal between Beijing and the Vatican — one that requires him to step aside in favor of a Communist Party-approved bishop.Above, Easter Mass at an unofficial church last year in Hebei Province._____• In Melbourne, the committal hearing of Cardinal George Pell is expected to adjourn today. The cardinal, the Catholic Church’s third highest-ranking priest, has been charged with committing “historical sexual offenses.”Courtroom drama on Wednesday: The magistrate asked Cardinal Pell’s lawyer to stop shouting at her, then she denied his request that she recuse herself from the case.Australia’s legal restrictions prevent the details of the Pell case from being made public. Once the hearing is adjourned, the magistrate is expected to announce her decision in mid-April._____• Myanmar has  a new president, but he’ll still be No. 2.U Win Myint, above, is a longtime loyalist to the country’s civilian leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, who is prohibited from serving as president. Mr. Win Myint is expected to do her bidding in the largely ceremonial post.Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi, a Nobel Peace laureate, has been condemned globally for the Myanmar military’s ethnic cleansing of Rohingya Muslims._____• Is your waiter rude, or just French?Few cultural stereotypes are more pervasive than the surly French garçon. That perception was even used as a defense in a recent wrongful termination suit in Canada.A French waiter who was fired for being combative and aggressive said his former bosses were discriminating against his culture and heritage.• Last week, we wrote about income inequality, focusing on how black boys and white boys raised in wealthy U.S. families fare as adults. Here are income mobility charts for Asian-Americans and other groups, and a tool to make your own comparisons.• Facebook will introduce a centralized system for its users to control their privacy and security settings in response to an outcry over the way it has handled personal data.• An advertising group that gave Cambridge Analytica a gold prize for its work for the Trump campaign is now urging marketers to reconsider the ethics of how consumer information is collected. (It has yet to rescind the award.)• Israel’s national airline, El Al, is suing the Israeli government and Air India for discrimination after Air India became the first commercial airline permitted to fly over Saudi Arabia to and from Israel.• U.S. stocks were mixed. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.• Beijing and parts of northern China have been smothered by a sandstorm that pushed the air quality index to hazardous levels. Above, Harbin on Wednesday. [Reuters]• Atlanta’s city government has been brought to its knees since March 22 by a ransomware attack — one of the most sustained and consequential cyberattacks ever mounted against a major U.S. city. [The New York Times]• In Egypt, it’s $3 a vote. With no real challenger in this week’s election, President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi is cajoling, coercing and even paying voters to ensure a credible turnout. [The New York Times]• A children’s book listing Hitler as a “great leader” has been removed from an Indian publisher’s website. [The New York Times]• In Cambodia, Prime Minister Hun Sen boasted that when it comes to negotiating skills, no one “is better than me in the history of world leaders.” (In the same speech, he refused to negotiate with opposition lawmakers.) [The Phnom Penh Post]• Australia’s indigenous languages are all derived from one common tongue, a new study shows. [SBS]Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• Being a wedding guest can get pricey. Here’s how to cut costs.• Have a tiny apartment? These are the best cleaning tools for a small space.• Recipe of the day: If you’re looking for big flavor, a chicken tagine is just what you need.• As the art world’s center of gravity shifts toward Asia, Art Basel Hong Kong is a platform for sales and access to collectors. But for some local galleries, the price to participate is too high. Above, “Black Glass Sun” by Olafur Eliason.• She felt let down by the way some magazines portrayed Asian cuisines — so she started her own. As the publishing industry struggles, a new generation of food magazines is depicting stories that have been overlooked or misrepresented.• And in this week’s Australia Diary, a multicultural group of friends gathered for a Hindu celebration of an important milestone: the first home purchase.On this day in 1961, the 23rd Amendment to the U.S. Constitution was approved by the required three-fourths of the states, giving Washingtonians the right to vote for president and vice president for the first time in more than 160 years.“The United States finally gave its capital the vote today,” The Times noted on its front page, with a hint of impatience.The amendment granted representation to the District of Columbia in the Electoral College, where states are given electors based on population. Although the District’s population (estimated at about 700,000 in 2017) is larger than that of some states, it is given no more electors than the least populous state, which is currently Wyoming.At the time, the push to give the vote to the District, with its large African-American population, became caught up in the civil rights movement. The amendment was opposed in the South, where Tennessee was the only state to ratify it.Democrats have since been able to count on the District’s three electoral votes, which have been cast for each of the party’s presidential candidates, starting with Lyndon Johnson in 1964.Although the District’s residents have a say at the White House, they lack a full voice in Congress, where their representative does not have full voting rights.Chris Stanford contributed reporting._____Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online. Sign up here to get it by email in the Australian, Asian, European or American morning. You can also receive an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights. And our Australia bureau chief offers a weekly letter adding analysis and conversations with readers. Browse our full range of Times newsletters here.What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com.SAN FRANCISCO — For months, Facebook’s critics — ranging from Silicon Valley executives to Washington politicians — have been urging the company to do a better job of identifying who is buying political ads and creating pages about hot-button topics on its social media sites.On Friday, just days before its chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, is expected to testify before Congress, Facebook said it had started forcing people who want to buy political or “issue” ads to reveal their identities and verify where they are.Mr. Zuckerberg announced the move in a post on Facebook. He said this verification was meant to prevent foreign interference in elections, like the ads and posts from so-called Russian trolls before and after the 2016 presidential election.Mr. Zuckerberg added that he supported a  Senate bill, the Honest Ads Act, that would bring political advertising on the internet more in line with what is required on broadcast television. One of the sponsors of the bill, which has some bipartisan support but is still in the committee stage, said that statement was a reversal from what Facebook had earlier indicated.In the coming months, Facebook will start verifying the identity and location of people who run pages — which everyone from sports teams and celebrities to partisan groups use to promote information — that have large followings, Mr. Zuckerberg said. The company would not specifically say what would make it ask a page’s creator for an identity, though it said the number of followers would be one factor.Facebook will also soon start clearly labeling political ads and providing more information about them, like who paid for them.Facebook is under increasing pressure to crack down on misinformation before this fall’s hotly contested midterm elections. And scrutiny of social media has become even more intense since the Justice Department charged 13 Russians and three companies in a February indictment that revealed a sophisticated network designed to subvert the 2016 election and to support the Trump campaign.Facebook recently removed 270 accounts associated with Russia’s Internet Research Agency, the “troll factory” that spread misinformation before and after the 2016 election.“These steps by themselves won’t stop all people trying to game the system,” Mr. Zuckerberg said in his post. “But they will make it a lot harder for anyone to do what the Russians did during the 2016 election and use fake accounts and pages to run ads.”The new policy for Facebook and for Instagram, which Facebook owns, covers only a part of what appears on those social media outlets. Most regular pages and accounts will still not require verification.Many of the deliberately misleading or outright false news stories on Facebook are shared among regular users, and they often come from residents of the United States. The company generally doesn’t regulate the content of posts, including their veracity, unless they violate its “community standards,” which prohibit bullying, pornography and threats, among other things.Facebook’s algorithms also tend to magnify the visibility of sensationalist posts because they tend to draw more clicks, reactions and comments.Effective immediately, people who want to run Facebook ads regarding political candidates or issues in the United States need to submit proof of a government-issued identification. They also have to have a mailing address in the United States, though some people think it would be easy for foreign agents to set up one.Facebook will mail a unique code for the advertiser to enter for verification, Andy Stone, a spokesman for Facebook, said. “Advertisers will also have to disclose what candidate, organization or business they represent,” he said in an email.The program will be rolled out to the rest of the world in the coming months, the company said.“We’re committed to getting this done in time for the critical months before the 2018 elections,” Mr. Zuckerberg said in his post.Initially, Mr. Zuckerberg scoffed at the idea that misinformation on Facebook could have played a role in the outcome of the 2016 presidential election. But starting last fall, the company was faced with — and eventually acknowledged — a series of revelations that Russian agents bought ads or spread misinformation on its social media outlets.Facebook said that between 2015 and 2017, 11.4 million Americans saw ads from the Internet Research Agency and more than 126 million users were likely to have seen the unpaid posts from the group’s Facebook pages.Law enforcement officials say Russian agents, looking to stir discord, posed as Americans with Facebook pages that represented a range of political viewpoints, from “Blacktivist” to “Heart of Texas.”The misinformation issue affected many of the company’s more than two billion users around the world. Just a day before Facebook announced its ad changes, civil society groups in Myanmar criticized Mr. Zuckerberg, arguing that he had mischaracterized his company’s effectiveness at detecting and quashing messages encouraging violence in the country.Facebook’s acknowledgment of its problems has accelerated in recent weeks, after revelations that the political consulting firm Cambridge Analytica, which worked with the Trump campaign, had improperly harvested the data of up to 87 million Facebook users.Mr. Zuckerberg is set to testify before the Senate’s Commerce and Judiciary Committees on Tuesday and the House Energy and Commerce Committee on Wednesday.He and Facebook’s chief operating officer, Sheryl Sandberg, have gone on a charm offensive ahead of the hearings. Mr. Zuckerberg spent an hour taking questions from reporters on Wednesday, and Ms. Sandberg has sat for a series of broadcast interviews this week. Both executives signaled that they knew the company had a problem that would not be easily fixed.Mr. Zuckerberg said Facebook would hire more people for the verifications, but did not say how many. Rob Goldman, Facebook’s vice president of advertising, and Alex Himel, its vice president of local business, said in a separate post that the company would also rely on software “to help find advertisers that should have gone through the authorizations process but did not.”They added that Facebook was also hoping its users would report political ads that didn’t have proper disclosures.Facebook will also begin adding “political ad” labels to such posts and will allow users to see who was behind political ads, the basic demographic information about who saw those ads and other ads run by those people, Mr. Goldman and Mr. Himel said. Facebook began testing its verifications over the past several days, “and people will begin seeing the label and additional information in the U.S. later this spring,” they said.Testing of the political ad disclosures has already begun in Canada and will roll out globally this summer, the company said.The policy builds on an announcement in October that Facebook would start verifying advertisers running “election-related” ads. Critics said that would not capture many of the ads run by Russian agents around the 2016 election, which focused on issues rather than specific elections. One Internet Research Agency ad, for example, featured a Confederate flag and said, “The South will rise again!”Facebook’s move on Friday would address those issue ads. Most of the Russian ads focused on “divisive political issues like guns, L.G.B.T. rights, immigration and racial issues,” Senator Mark Warner, Democrat of Virginia, said in a statement.“That’s why today’s announcement by Facebook is so important,” he added.Facebook hadn’t always been on board with such disclosures. In October, Mr. Warner co-sponsored the Honest Ads Act, which would require tech companies to disclose who is behind political ads on their sites. Facebook told congressional aides that it would struggle to comply with the legislation because it often struggled to understand whether an ad was political or commercial, and that the sheer number of Facebook ads also complicated that task.Rachel Cohen, a spokeswoman for Mr. Warner, said on Friday that his office had met with Facebook officials regarding the bill several times and that they hadn’t supported it.Another co-sponsor of the bill, Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota, applauded Facebook on Friday for voluntarily complying with the bill’s proposals, but added in a statement that “a patchwork of voluntary measures from tech companies isn’t going to cut it.”Facebook’s political-ad disclosures would in some ways do more than what is expected of television networks because the company would allow users to see all of the ads run by a group, said Travis Ridout, a Washington State University professor and co-director of the Wesleyan Media Project, which tracks political advertising.Still, Facebook’s verification plans don’t seem foolproof, Mr. Ridout said. “It’s certainly a great step to take and helps to solve the problem of foreign influence,” he said. “But I would not be surprised if people get creative and find ways around those requirements.” Good Monday. Here’s what we’re watching.• Elon Musk finally responded to last week’s bad news about Tesla.• Trump continues to go after Amazon.• China retaliated to President Trump’s steel and aluminum tariffs.• Tech leaders have been keeping mum on Facebook.Get this in your inbox each morning. Sign up here.For months, the stock market rally seemed to have the strength to plow through the obstacles that the Trump administration threw in its way.But now, the S.&P. 500 index is down more than 10 percent from its all-time high.President Donald Trump’s actions seem to be increasingly taking their toll. When the Trump administration first pushed for steel and aluminum tariffs in February, investors weren’t happy, but the market soon rebounded. Now investors seem to be growing more nervous as the United States’ biggest trading partners show signs that they are ready to fight back. China’s retaliatory tariffs, which appear to be more stringent than expected, suggest the country will take a hard stance.Early in his presidency, investors quickly learned to shrug off  Mr. Trump’s criticism of companies. In recent days, though, Mr. Trump has targeted Amazon in tweets, asserting that the company has an unfair advantage. It’s not clear what he could do to hurt Amazon’s business, but the company’s stock has plunged. Amazon’s shares may well bounce back, but the criticism has added to investors’ concerns about the outlook for large technology companies, whose soaring stock prices spearheaded the rally that took to the S.&P. 500 to its all-time high in January.Too much blame can be placed on the White House, however.Before investors began fretting about tech and trade, the underpinnings of the stock market’s ascent were perhaps not as robust as they looked. Wall Street analysts expect earnings for the companies in the S.&P. 500 to increase 25 percent this year, according to data compiled by Standard & Poor’s, an unusually large jump that was reflected in the stock market valuations. Much of that projected earnings increase is coming from tax cuts and some from expectations that companies’ revenue would grow at a nice clip as global growth stayed strong.The tax cuts are certainly going to improve profits. But rising interest rates around the world could weigh somewhat on companies’ revenue growth. And if wages and other costs come in higher than expected — a significant possibility when the economy is suffering a shortage of some workers — profit margins could get squeezed. “I don’t think either of those are in the numbers,” said Jim Paulsen, chief market strategist at the Leuthold Group.— Peter EavisA little humor has not cleared the clouds over Tesla.Shares in the company were once again sliding on Monday after the company’s C.E.O., Elon Musk, joked on April 1 that Tesla had gone bankrupt, an apparent attempt to make light of concerns that the electric car maker is straining under its debt load.Tesla’s stock is now down 35 percent from its high of last year. A major reason for the slide is the company’s struggles to meet production targets for its lower-priced Model 3 car. Delays, of course, raise questions about Tesla’s ability to become an efficient mass producer of autos. The company needs to sell a significantly higher number of cars to generate the cash to finance its business and meet debt payments. Tesla is expected early this week to release its first-quarter production and delivery numbers.Electrek, a publication that covers electric vehicles, reported late Monday morning that Mr. Musk had sent out an email to employees saying that the company was producing more than 2,000 Model 3s a week. Tesla’s stock bounced after the report.Tesla’s technology is also facing intense scrutiny after one of its Model X cars crashed on March 23, killing the driver. Tesla said late Friday that its assisted driving system, called Autopilot, was engaged in the car before its collision with a concrete divider. As our colleague Neal E. Boudette wrote:Tesla’s website says one of Autopilot’s safety features is “Automatic Emergency Braking.” But a Tesla owner’s manual warns riders that this feature “is not designed to avoid a collision.” Wired recently reported that systems like Autopilot are not necessarily designed to detect static obstacles. In the words of one expert:Doubts about the fundamental capabilities of Tesla’s Autopilot could crimp demand for its cars among a customer base that is often seeking the best technology.Questions are also swirling around the timing of Tesla’s announcement about the crash. In its first communication about the accident, the company said:The investigation is not over. Yet Tesla went ahead and provided its update on Friday. The motive for doing so is not clear. The United States National Transportation Safety Board on Sunday said it was “unhappy” that Tesla had released information about the crash.- Peter EavisTech companies are again dragging down stocks on Wall Street.The S.&P. 500 and the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite are off 3.1 percent and 3.5 percent Monday. The continued fall in the share prices of some of the biggest tech companies is weighing heavily on the indexes.Amazon is down 5.4 percent, Netflix is off 5.9 percent, Facebook fell 3 percent, Google-parent Alphabet slipped 3.6 percent and Apple dropped 5.9 percent.After leading the market higher for much of the past two years, tech stocks have hit some turbulence. Since March 16, Facebook, Alphabet, Netflix and Amazon are all down more than 12 percent, while Apple is down 7.3 percent.Over that period the business models of those companies have come under increased scrutiny. News that Cambridge Analytica, a political data firm hired by President Trump’s 2016 election campaign, gained access to private information on more than 50 million Facebook users has weighed not only on the shares of Facebook but on Alphabet as well. Amazon, meanwhile, has come under attack from President Trump.In all, those companies have lost more than $300 billion in market value the past two weeks.President Trump attacked the e-commerce again on Monday morning.Monday’s tweet is the latest over the past five days from Mr. Trump criticizing Amazon. Over that period, Mr. Trump has accused Amazon of not paying enough taxes, of putting thousands of local retailers out of business and of using the United States Postal Service as its “Delivery Boy.”Mr. Trump’s willingness to again single out Amazon and characterize it as a tax cheat and a job killer is a remarkable use of the presidential bully pulpit that could have serious implications for the company even without any formal moves by the federal government.Amazon’s shares are down 4 percent and are off nearly 11 percent since Axios reported on Wednesday about Mr. Trump’s anger toward the company.Context• Amazon has said that the Postal Regulatory Commission, which oversees the service, has consistently found that its contracts with Amazon are profitable.• The internet giant collects sales taxes on its own products in all 45 states that have one, but third-party vendors who sell products on the site often do not collect sales tax, a fact that rivals say is unfair. In addition, some municipalities complain that the company does not collect local taxes.Critic’s cornerDA Davidson analyst Tom Forte wrote in a note via Reuters:Shares of the chip maker are down 9 percent, their steepest decline in more than two years, after Bloomberg reported that Apple is planning to use its own chips in Mac computers beginning as early as 2020.Citing anonymous sources, Bloomberg’s Ian King and Matt Gurman report:Apple provides Intel with about 5 percent of its annual revenue.Kenneth C. Griffin’s Citadel has just hired Phil Villhauer, a former top trader at Steven A. Cohen’s investment firm. Mr. Villhauer will become deputy head of global equities at Citadel, a newly created position. He will officially join the Chicago-based hedge fund in the middle of April and work out of Citadel’s office in New York, a Citadel spokesman confirmed.“We see this as a big hire for us,” said Zia Ahmed, a Citadel spokesman.Mr. Villhauer left Mr. Cohen’s family office, Point72 Asset Management, in October after working for the billionaire investor for roughly 15 years. Mr. Villhauer had started at Mr. Cohen’s former firm, SAC Capital Advisors, and most recently served as head of global trading at Point72.The timing of Mr. Villhauer’s departure came just months before Mr. Cohen was to begin managing money for outside investors.In January, Mr. Cohen reconfigured Point72 as a hedge fund after establishing it as a family office in 2014 to manage $11 billion of his personal wealth. Point72 has said it has raised between $2 billion and $4 billion in outside money.Mr. Villhauer had been with Mr. Cohen through both the good days and bad days. He was there when SAC turned into a powerhouse hedge fund, and he was there when the fund pleaded guilty to insider trading charges in 2013. The guilty plea required the firm to stop managing money for outside investors.When Mr. Villhauer left Point72, Mr. Cohen, in a letter to employees, called the departure a “retirement” and said he was sad to see Mr. Villhauer go.Now Mr. Villhauer will start a new chapter in his career at another well-known hedge fund firm.____________________________As Facebook lurches from crisis to crisis, other tech leaders like Marc Benioff and Tim Cook have criticized the company. But, for the most part, it’s in their culture to stick together,  Nick Wingfield writes.Customers have less trouble speaking out, but those looking to punish major tech companies are finding that but boycotts are easier said than done.At Facebook, the turmoil continued this weekend after a 2016 memo was leaked in which Andrew Bosworth, a vice president, wrote, “Maybe someone dies in a terrorist attack coordinated on our tools. And still we connect people. The ugly truth is that we believe in connecting people so deeply that anything that allows us to connect more people more often is *de factor* good.”Mr. Bosworth and Mark Zuckerberg disavowed the memo, but the fallout has been wide, with employees calling for a hunt to find leakers.Critic’s corner “Mr. Zuckerberg’s comments suggest he still doesn’t get it: What matters is not whether internet companies ‘deserve’ our private information but why we as consumers do not have meaningful ways to protect that data from being siphoned for sale in the first place,” Tom Wheeler, a former F.C.C. chairman, writes in an NYT op-ed.More on data and privacy Hackers have stolen more than five million credit and debit card numbers from Saks and Lord & Taylor, a cybersecurity firm said. Amazon and other companies have filed patents that show how assistants could monitor what people say, information that could then be used for ads and product recommendations. For critics, this highlights the need for regulators to get more involved in data collection. Entrepreneurs, companies and governments are looking into whether  blockchain could be the answer to fears about personal data being shared too liberally.• President Trump accused The Washington Post of operating as a lobbyist for Amazon, escalating his assault on the company. He also accused Amazon of a “Post Office scam,” although Amazon brings in money for the Postal Service. (WaPo)• A global race to automate stores is underway as retailers seek to prevent Amazon from dominating their market. China has been an especially fertile place for these experiments. (NYT)• The tech industry has warmed to the White House. (NYT)• The European Commission is preparing to crack down on social media companies accused of spreading fake news. (FT)• A Russian man accused of hacking three U.S. technology companies in 2012 has been extradited from the Czech Republic. (NYT)• Alibaba is taking full control of the food delivery start-up Ele.me. (Bloomberg)• Dara Khosrowshahi is trying to change Uber’s image, but can he do it without sacrificing elements that made the company successful? (The New Yorker)• 3-D printing technology is moving into the construction business. (WSJ)• Beijing has unveiled a pilot program that would allow Chinese tech giants to see their shares bought and sold at home. (Bloomberg)• Magic Leap is requiring software developers to keep its mysterious augmented reality headsets under tight security. (LAT)The Chinese government said on Monday that it would place tariffs on the imports of 128 American-made products in retaliation for to President Trump’s tariffs on steel and aluminum.Beijing appeared to go a step beyond its initial threat, Chris Buckley reported. On the list is pork, an important moneymaker in many states that voted for President Trump.The Washington flyaround• Mr. Trump tweeted on Sunday that there would be no deal to protects thousands of young immigrants brought to the country as children and threatened to walk away from the North American Free Trade Agreement.• The FirstEnergy bankruptcy could be an important moment for the Trump administration and its commitment to the coal industry. (WSJ)• Ties to the White House have proven to be a wellspring of trouble for the Kushner family. (NYT)• Are undersea cables used to communicate around the world under risk of attack? (AP)• The bankruptcy of Remington, one of the country’s oldest gunmakers, has stalled a ruling in a lawsuit by family members of those killed in the Sandy Hook shooting. (NYT)• Would firing special counsel Robert Mueller lead to impeachment proceedings? (NYT)• John Bolton, the incoming national security adviser, has argued repeatedly that the United States should engage in cyber warfare. (Politico)When the Justice Department allowed Live Nation to merge with Ticketmaster, it tried to assuage concerns that the deal would cripple competitors.But critics have reason to be skeptical. Here’s how Beau Buffier, the chief of the New York Attorney General’s Antitrust Bureau, described Live Nation:The Justice Department is looking into complaints that Live Nation has used its control over concert tours to pressure venues into contracting with Ticketmaster, a possible violation of antitrust law.The inquiries come as the department is reviewing two more mergers, between AT&T and Time Warner, and Disney and Fox.The department’s new antitrust chief has said that the Live Nation deal and several other deals posed problems because they relied too much on the federal government’s ability to police corporate behavior.“Even if we wanted to do that, we often don’t have the skills or the tools to do so effectively,” the antitrust chief, Assistant Attorney General Makan Delrahim, said in a speech.More for your playlistSpotify’s shares begin trading on Tuesday with a valuation that could exceed $20 billion. But the company still hasn’t turned a profit, and its direct listing could spook investors. The streaming service also is looking to take on music labels directly by “building a two-sided marketplace for users and artists.”The deals flyaround• Walmart’s takeover of Humana isn’t guaranteed, but hospitals are already worried that the deal could hit their bottom lines at a difficult time. (WSJ)• Protectionist policies are increasing barriers to deal making. (WSJ)• Looking to merge asset management divisions, UBS is asking for discounts from fund managers. (FT)• The corporate raider Samuel Belzberg has died at 89. (NYT)• Steve Schwarzman has discovered that $25 million doesn’t necessarily buy naming rights for a public high school. (The Philadelphia Inquirer)• The South China Morning Post has long been Hong Kong’s English-language paper of record. Alibaba has made it part of Beijing’s efforts to project soft power abroad. (NYT)• The accrediting council at center of a for-profit college fraud scandal is looking for a comeback. (NYT)• Coffee sellers are trying to fight a California judge’s ruling that would require the beverage to carry cancer warning labels. (NYT)• Bill Gross is struggling to attract investors to Janus Henderson. (FT)• Nike is reviewing its human resources department after employees raised concerns about pay equity and corporate culture. (WSJ)• In a tight labor market, employers are recruiting refugees to fill undesirable jobs. (NYT)• Is the storied guitar maker Gibson headed for a bankruptcy filing? (NYT)• The new chairman of the Motion Picture Association of America is a Hollywood insider and Washington influencer. (NYT)• Companies are loading up on debt in what could be another area of concern for financial markets. (WSJ)• Some arbitrage funds are struggling to benefit from a boom in mergers. (WSJ)• Devet Capital keeps costs low by flying economy and using Airbnb for business travel. (WSJ)Know someone who would enjoy this newsletter? Tell them to sign up here.You can find live updates throughout the day at nytimes.com/dealbook.We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bizday@nytimes.com.Good Thursday. Here’s what we’re watching:• Why Trump might have trouble reining in Amazon.• Public pension fund wants changes to Facebook’s board.• Trump tweets Amazon does not pay enough taxes.• Another FANG stock took a tumble.• The Trump administration wants to further thwart sensitive Chinese investments.The DealBook newsletter is taking a break for Good Friday. We’ll be back with you on Monday. Sign up for it here.Amazon hasn’t responded to President Trump’s latest tweet about the company, and most likely won’t.Mr. Trump’s criticisms, though, are largely mistaken. For a long time, Amazon did not pay state sales tax, but it does so now when it sells its own goods in states that collect it. It is the case, however, that in most states Amazon does not collect sales taxes on goods sold by third parties through its platform. As for the United States Postal Service, Amazon’s business appears to be giving a welcome lift to its package shipping revenue.Still, Amazon cannot quietly hope that such criticism just fades away. Amazon’s rapid growth, immense bargaining power, eye-catching initiatives and estimated 44 percent share of U.S. e-commerce sales make the company vulnerable to accusations that it is too powerful.But if the Trump administration pursues ways to curtail the company, it would meet sizable obstacles.Amazon accounts for only 4 percent of all retail sales in the United States, a recent survey estimated. Its revenue is a third of Walmart’s and, even after its acquisition of Whole Foods, Amazon’s footing in the grocery business is still small.All in all, it would be hard to show that Amazon is pushing prices higher for consumers.Amazon also has a loyal customer base — it has an estimated 90 million Prime members — and the public views it relatively favorably. When the Department of Justice’s antitrust lawyers went after the proposed merger of Time Warner and AT&T, it was not targeting companies that were particularly popular with the public.Still, some Amazon critics see a possible, though small, opening. In theory, an antitrust case could focus on the firms that supply Amazon with goods, according to Christopher L. Sagers, a law professor at Cleveland State University. If a company consistently uses its power to demand a good from suppliers at too low a price, the public could still get hurt. That’s because the supply of the good could decline, its quality degrade, and there may be less innovation in the sector that produces the good, Mr. Sagers said.But anyone bringing that against Amazon would have to explain why Walmart would not be a target, too.— Peter EavisThe investment adviser to New York City’s pension funds is calling for changes to Facebook’s board to address the fallout from Cambridge Analytica’s improper harvesting of information from 50 million users of the social network.New York City’s comptroller, Scott M. Stringer, wrote in a letter addressed to Dr. Susan Desmond-Hellmann, an independent director at Facebook and the chief executive of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation:New York City’s pension funds, which have more than $193 billion in assets under management, own $895 million of Facebook’s shares, according to the letter. Even with the recent tumble in its shares, Facebook is valued at more than $450 billion.In his letter, Mr. Stringer calls on Facebook’s independent directors to take four steps to help restore investor confidence.Here are the proposed changes:1) Add at least three new independent directors to improve the board’s ability to oversee the evolving risks Facebook faces.2) Name an independent director as chairman, allowing Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive and chairman, to focus on running the company.3) Create a committee of independent directors to oversee the company’s data privacy policies and risks.4) Institute a clawback policy so that the board can “recoup executive pay in the event of violations of law, regulation or company policy.”President Trump spoke out against Amazon on Thursday, saying that the online behemoth does not pay enough taxes and uses the United States postal system “as their Delivery Boy.”The president’s commentary, made in a Twitter post, comes amid reports that Mr. Trump has expressed an interest in reining in the e-commerce business.Amazon and the company’s founder, Jeff Bezos, are among Mr. Trump’s regular Twitter targets. In December, Mr. Trump questioned whether the United States Post Office charges Amazon enough for package deliveries. And in August, Mr. Trump said Amazon hurts taxpaying businesses.Amazon, however, does pay taxes — $412 million in 2016, for instance, according to the company’s report to the Securities and Exchange Commission.Axios reported on Wednesday that Mr. Trump has wondered aloud whether Amazon could be vulnerable to antitrust or competition laws.Amazon shares fell more than 7 percent following that Axios article but recovered some of those losses after a White House official told Reuters that the company faced no particular policy changes. But the administration is always looking at its options, the official added. The stock closed down 4.4 percent Wednesday.Shares were down nearly 2 percent in early trading.Should shareholders worry? The GBH Insights analyst Daniel Ives told Bloomberg that this regulatory threat was unlikely to change Amazon’s business model, but it was still “the last thing nervous tech investors wanted to see today.”Retailers, at least, already have some reason to be cheerful.And Amazon has another target market for expansion: housekeeping.Corporate American will start reporting first-quarter results in less than two weeks, and earnings are expected to be big.Analysts estimate that profits at companies in the S.&P. 500 grew 17.3 percent this quarter, according to FactSet. If the forecasts prove accurate that would be highest earnings growth rate since the first quarter of 2011.Perhaps most surprising, is that analysts have grown more optimistic on corporate earnings as the quarter progressed. The earnings forecast for the index rose 5.4 percent from the start of the quarter to the end. Typically, analysts lower their expectations as the quarter progresses. On average, the profit estimates for the index fall 3.7 percent from the start of the quarter to the end.But there are reasons for investors to temper their enthusiasm. Analysts have not been as optimistic about the abilities of companies to increase sales. Revenue is expected to have grown 7.3 percent in the first quarter, up from a 7 percent rate at the start of the quarter.That suggests analysts are not raising estimates because of increased sales. So why are they? Taxes. And the impact tax reform will have on bottom lines should moderate in the coming quarters.That may already be happening. BofA Merrill Lynch’s earnings revision ratio for the S.&P. 500 fell in March for the first time in three months. Of course, the pullback comes after the ratio hits the highest level on record in February, but it does suggest that earnings lift from tax reform has begun to wane.Investors, always willing to believe in technology companies, spent the last three years piling into their shares with abandon. Now the intellectual underpinnings of that rally are being tested.Exhibit A: Facebook, down 20 percent from its recent high.Exhibit B: Nvidia, off 12 percent from its recent high.Exhibit C: Tesla, not a tech stock but in the FANG+ index.Concerns about Tesla’s ability to fund itself can also be seen in the trading of its debt.The WSJ’s Charley Grant explains:Peter Eavis notes that the latest problems for tech giants have raised deeper doubts:Barclays said on Thursday that it agreed to pay $2 billion to settle a lawsuit by United States authorities that accused the British bank of fraudulently misleading the public in the sale of tens of billions of dollars in securities backed by home mortgages.The Justice Department sued the bank in December 2016 after the two sides failed to reach a settlement despite months of talks. The settlement is the latest by a European lender related to residential mortgage-backed securities sold ahead of the financial crisis and follows agreements reached by Credit Suisse and Deutsche Bank in late 2016.“I am pleased that we have been able to reach a fair and proportionate settlement with the Department of Justice,” James E. Staley, the Barclays chief executive, said in a news release. “It has been a priority for this management team from the start to resolve these historic issues in a timely and appropriate manner wherever possible.”Two former Barclays executives who were sued along with the bank also have reached settlements, agreeing to pay a combined $2 million, the Justice Department said in a news release.Their lawyers separately said the government’s claims were baseless and each agreed to settle the case without admitting wrongdoing.- Chad BrayTammy Kiely is leaving Goldman Sachs to join Morgan Stanley as global head of semiconductor and auto technology investment banking, according to an internal memo seen by The New York Times.Ms. Kiely, who will be based in Menlo Park, Calif., joined Goldman in 1999 and had headed its semiconductor investment banking team since 2006, becoming a partner in 2014. Before Goldman, she worked at KPMG as a certified public accountant in its information, communications and entertainment practice.She has a bachelor’s degree in business administration from the California Polytechnic State University and an M.B.A. from the Stanford University Graduate School of Business.Following her arrival, Mark Edelstone will become chairman of global semiconductor investment banking at Morgan Stanley.The move comes amid a wave of dealmaking among chip makers the past few years.- Chad BrayRevolving door• Equifax has a new C.E.O.: the former G.E. executive Mark Begor. (NYT)• Lior Ron, who helped found the self-driving truck company Otto, has left Uber, which acquired it. (NYT)• A.G. Gangadhar has left G.M.’s self-driving car company, Cruise, after six months as chief technology officer. (Recode)The Advertising Research Foundation gave Cambridge Analytica an award last year. Amid the scandal over Facebook data, it’s thinking again.But the group’s executive, Scott McDonald, said that advertisers cared more about whether the data tech companies offered was accurate than whether they should have collected it.Facebook, for its part, promised yesterday to stop advertisers targeting ads using data from third-party brokers, and to put its user privacy settings in one place, rather than about 20. It’s also rethinking privacy safeguards for forthcoming devices, The Information says.Tim Cook of Apple is calling for privacy regulation: “To me, it’s creepy when I look at something and all of a sudden it’s chasing me all across the web.”And our Kevin Roose considers how to save social media: Facebook could become more of a collective enterprise, social networks could become more like email or users could put an expiry date on information.The tech flyaround• Expect more deals from SoftBank’s Vision Fund. It wants to be the biggest shareholder in 100 tech companies, then consolidate them. It’s nearing a deal for a stake in Swiss Re, too.• The German automakers BMW and Daimler have teamed up to fight Silicon Valley. (NYT)• A Google early-stage venture fund is leading a $6 million investment in a company building software to let cars be driven remotely (by humans). (Bloomberg)• Boeing said it had been hit by WannaCry, the malware that struck in 70 countries last year. (NYT)• Apple facies several lawsuits from consumers for slowing older iPhones to extend battery life. (WSJ)• Warner Music bought Sodatone, a start-up that promises to spot hits early using machine learning. (FT)• How 5G will redraw the map of the wireless industry. (WSJ)While finalizing its plans for trade restrictions, the Trump administration is moving ahead with a more targeted strike against Chinese investment in sensitive American technology.But the Treasury Department faces a challenge if, as planned, it uses the 1977 International Emergency Economic Powers Act.“Just defining what percentage of equity would classify a firm as ‘state-owned’ is difficult, as is the definition of which technologies should be off limits,” the WSJ’s Bob Davis writes. “In some cases, U.S. firms could rely on Chinese ones for innovation, especially in manufacturing.”The political flyaround• A lawsuit arguing that President Trump’s continued business interests violate the Constitution has passed its first test. (NYT)• Republicans’ plan for a second tax cut before the midterm elections has yet to attract much financial support from business. (WaPo)• Treasury bonds remain attractive to investors, but Moody’s argues that the U.S. may have less flexibility for future borrowing. (WSJ)• An infrastructure bill passed before the midterms? Trump administration officials are trying to lower expectations. (WSJ)• Mr. Trump declared the Second Amendment would “never be repealed,” in response to a former Supreme Court justice’s NYT Op-Ed. (NYT)Four women sought police protection against Douglas E. Greenberg, one of Morgan Stanley’s top financial advisers.Executives at the bank knew about his behavior, former employees said, but no action was taken until the NYT raised the issue this week.The bank’s wealth-management division accounts for nearly half Morgan Stanley’s revenue and is seen as its prime source of future profits.With an aging and declining population in Japan, companies have to look elsewhere to grow. Takeda Pharmaceuticals’ potential bid for Shire could be one of the largest acquisitions ever of a Western company by a Japanese buyer.Critics’ corner: It’s not really about cost savings, argues Bloomberg Gadfly’s Chris Hughes: “In reality, the attraction is that Shire is cheap and vulnerable — something other bidders will see.” And the FT’s Lex would welcome that: “There are better potential matches.” AT&T-Time Warner trial update: The head of Turner broadcasting said that his company’s channels would not be used as a weapon against rivals if the deal went through. The judge overseeing the case told the parties to speed up their presentation. And if the deal isn’t completed by Apr. 22, it may cost AT&T  up to $1.1 billion in special redemptions.The deals flyaround• Concho Resources will buy RSP Permian for $9.5 billion, creating a shale-oil colossus and adding to the rush to produce more oil. (NYT)• Renault and Nissan are in talks to merge, unnamed sources said. (Bloomberg)• Vivendi and Elliott Management are tussling over Telecom Italia. (FT)• Stella McCartney has agreed to buy Kering out of her fashion brand, regaining full control. (NYT)• CME Group has offered to buy NEX Group, which operates bond-trading platforms, for $5.4 billion. (WSJ)• The defense contractor CACI International has withdraw its bid for CSRA, which offers information technology services to government agencies and now looks likely to be acquired by General Dynamics. (WaPo)• Silver Lake is taking a $500 million stake in the online personal finance company Credit Karma. (WSJ)• The technology company DocuSign, not yet profitable, has filed for an I.P.O. (WSJ)• Anbang, the insurer seized by the Chinese government, is continuing to offer the small-investor products that fueled its growth. (NYT)• The economics of home buying are getting interesting, with higher mortgage rates, tax changes and a supply-demand imbalance. (NYT)• Wells Fargo is taking a measured approach to the gun debate, its chief executive, Tim Sloan, said — but does not believe a bank can be an “arbiter of what an American can buy.” (Charlotte Observer)• Bumble is suing Match Group, which owns Tinder, accusing it of stealing trade secrets and interfering in Bumble’s business. (Recode)• Deutsche Bank is considering more cuts in its investment bank, unnamed sources say, while its chief executive, John Cryan, has insisted that he’s staying. (Bloomberg)• The Wing, a members’ club for women, is being investigated by New York authorities for discrimination. (NYT)• The C.F.T.C. chairman, J. Christopher Giancarlo, has become a Twitter star — complete with a nickname, “Cryptodad” — over his digital currency views. (Bloomberg)• Investors who lost money on the blood-testing firm Theranos may end up fighting the S.E.C. over its assets. (Bloomberg)Know someone who would enjoy this newsletter? Tell them to sign up here.You can find live updates throughout the day at nytimes.com/dealbook.We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bizday@nytimes.com.
