Less than a week after winning his first N.B.A. championship, one might expect Kevin Durant to be basking on an island somewhere, content that his off-season gamble to take up with the Golden State Warriors had paid off.But on Sunday night, Durant waded into the swamp of Twitter to have it out with fans who were still smarting about his departure last summer from the Thunder — a team that he had played with for the entirety of its existence in Oklahoma City, where it moved in 2008.Over the course of several hours, Durant, the newly minted N.B.A. finals M.V.P., exchanged lighthearted jabs with those critics, in a lengthy and unusual show of social media spontaneity for a star athlete. In doing so, Durant nonchalantly confronted critics lobbing accusations that are likely to dog him for seasons to come: that he abandoned Oklahoma City for a super-squad in Oakland, and in doing so, handicapped his odds of winning a championship.“Why you talking to people on Twitter like you some sort of validated champ? Your ring was given, not earned,” said one user, Troy Mineer. “You’re soft bro. Soft.”When Durant, who averaged 35.2 points, 8.2 rebounds and 5.4 assists during the finals, responded with a play on the word “validated,” the user became more emotional.“I had so much love for you man,” he tweeted. “I was your biggest fan and you did something I can’t respect. Why dude?”Another user urged Durant to stop acknowledging the critics, saying, “You got the title bro…just leave the OKC people alone.”But Durant made it clear that he was not looking for advice on how to conduct himself.“Relax, I’m not new to this app,” he replied. “Fall back.”The superstar had already seemed relatively comfortable in his new role as a villain. Just moments after the Warriors closed out the finals with a win in Game 5 last week, a new Nike commercial aired, responding to the barbs that have been slung at Durant over the course of his career. The ad ends with Durant silencing his critics by winning the championship, as the words, “Debate This” flash on the screen.But in the real world — or at least on Twitter — basketball fans are not so easily silenced. Durant’s longest exchange came with a self-identified Thunder fan, who called him a snake and a liar, compared him negatively to his former teammate Russell Westbrook and called his departure “the weakest move in sports.”Even as he continued to engage, Durant seemed wholly unburdened by the insults.“Do you have any friends?” he asked, in response to the name-calling. “Twitter followers don’t count, ok?Later in the night, a user named Dexter Loux asked him what many were likely thinking.“Bruh you won a ring like a week ago,” he wrote. “You gotta have better stuff to be doing right now than arguing with people on here.”“Nah I’m flying right now and the wifi kicked in,” Durant responded. “I don’t have anything else to do.”
