What had appeared to be a disastrous Wednesday night for the Mets looked a little better on Thursday morning.The results of the previous night’s game — a 7-0 loss to the Atlanta Braves after which the Mets fell out of first place in the National League East for the first time since April 3 — did not change, but the results of a magnetic resonance imaging exam on Jacob deGrom’s right elbow offered a glimmer of hope.DeGrom left Wednesday’s game after pitching the fourth inning. He had felt a twinge in his right biceps when he swung and missed while batting in the bottom of the third.Despite fears that deGrom, the Mets’ No. 2 starter, might have sustained yet another structural injury to his pitching elbow, which has already been surgically repaired twice, the M.R.I. exam administered after the game came back clean.On Thursday, deGrom and Manager Mickey Callaway said that the injury was minor and that he would most likely make his next scheduled start on Monday against the Reds in Cincinnati.“Nothing wrong with him,” Callaway said before the Mets’ afternoon game against the Braves at Citi Field. “The M.R.I. looked good. He’s in a better spot than we thought with him coming out of the game last night.”At the time he left the game, deGrom had shut out the Braves on two hits and struck out six, including striking out the side in the third.“I said, ‘I don’t know if it’s smart to keep going,’” deGrom said. “I probably could’ve pitched through it, but it wasn’t smart. It’s still early. What’s the point of pitching through something and actually injuring yourself? I think it was kind of erring on the side of precaution.”After an examination by the team doctor, David Altchek, deGrom echoed Callaway’s optimism on Thursday. “I feel pretty good,” he said. “Dr. Altchek said prepare as normal. So I’m looking to do some treatment today, play catch tomorrow and throw a bullpen on Saturday.”Callaway stopped short of guaranteeing that deGrom would make his next scheduled start. “We’re going to really home in on him and make sure everything is 100 percent if he’s going to make his start on Monday,” Callaway said, adding that he had not yet considered a replacement starter if deGrom was unable to go.The loss of deGrom, who is 3-0 with a 1.87 earned-run average, could have been devastating to the Mets, who have already lost catchers Travis d’Arnaud and Kevin Plawecki and reliever Anthony Swarzak to injuries. But deGrom said he felt similar discomfort in the past after swinging and missing, without dire consequences.“I’ve been injured before in the spot it was in, so I wasn’t as worried,” he said. “I knew this had got to be more of a muscle thing than structural. Looking back, I probably should have taken the pitch and struck out.”It was the second time this week the Mets had dodged a bullet. On Sunday, outfielder Yoenis Cespedes jammed his thumb on a slide and was expected to miss several days. But Cespedes missed no time and homered in Tuesday’s 3-2 loss to the Braves.
