They called themselves the Glass Ceiling Club.A group of young and ambitious women in the 1990s from the investment bank Bear Stearns would gather at local restaurants every couple of months to discuss how to make the workplace more female friendly. The conversations would inevitably turn to their male colleagues, including the ones who behaved badly, said Maureen Sherry, a former managing director, who met regularly with the other women.“Of course, our conversations would revert to sharing facts we knew about the men we worked with,” recalled Ms. Sherry, who spent nine years at Bear Stearns before leaving in 2000, adding, “yes, it was mostly the same men who preyed on young women.”For women who had to interact with some of the most notorious sexual harassers, Ms. Sherry said she recommended they stay on the trading floor — a very public space.“Survival hints like that were shared pretty freely,” Ms. Sherry wrote in an email.That was the whisper network at work.For as long as women have been in the labor force, this kind of behind-the-scenes support system has served as a vital source of shared information and a safe space for communal commiseration. Advice on salary negotiations, office politics and the work-life balance would be disseminated through informal conversations at cubicles, in cafeterias and over drinks at happy hour.But the network also allowed employees to clue each other into a spectrum of behavior that was often unseen or ignored by their employers — the boss who scoffs at maternity leave, the manager known for ribald jokes, the colleague rumored to be a groper, or worse.Now, with the internet offering a clearinghouse for complaints — intensified by the outpouring of allegations against prominent figures like the producer Harvey Weinstein — whisper networks have been amplified. Through public forums, invitation-only Facebook groups, private Google surveys, locked websites and shielded threads on anonymous apps, women — and some men — are seeking catharsis and validation by sharing their stories.“We’re in this interesting period right now, kind of a hopeful period, where having prominent people name and talk about harassment has put a heightened awareness of it on the table,’’ said Fatima Goss Graves, chief executive of the National Women’s Law Center.“When you have one person come forward, they become a huge target,” she added, “but when more people come out, it’s hard to go after all of them.”In many cases, the network is driven by firsthand knowledge. Other times, it can be pure speculation. Allegations are often made anonymously and can quickly spread in online forums, damaging reputations before the accused can defend themselves. Men targeted by whisper networks complain of being subject to vigilantism and public shaming; some have threatened legal action.At Bear Stearns — which was sold to JPMorgan Chase in 2008, during the financial crisis — the Glass Ceiling Club would warn others about the senior manager who had a history of affairs and a tendency to relocate his previous liaisons to remote offices, recalled Ms. Sherry, who last year published a semi-autobiographical novel, “Opening Belle,’’ about her experiences.The women in the whisper network “weren’t best girlfriends,’’ Ms. Sherry said.“What we did have in common was that we were ambitious professionals with the common goal of a more equal place of employment and so yes, that included our perplexity over outrageous behavior that went unchecked.“Two decades later, fewer than two in 10 female harassment victims ever file a formal complaint, according to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.The reluctance stems in part from the risks associated with reporting harassment, including fear of retaliation, according to The Harvard Business Review. Many women have reported being fired or sidelined at work after speaking up and labeled troublemakers while their tormentors face few, if any, consequences.But when the whisper network moves onto social media platforms, accusations can gather momentum and quickly yield results.In early October, a number of women came forward on Twitter to accuse Andy Signore, the creator of the popular YouTube series “Honest Trailers” and “Screen Junkies,” of sexual harassment.One woman, April O’Donnell, said in a series of Twitter posts that Mr. Signore had tried to sexually assault her on multiple occasions. Ms. O’Donnell, who did not return several attempts to reach her, said on her Twitter feed that she and two other women had reported Mr. Signore in August to human resources at Defy Media, which owns “Screen Junkies,” which said it started an investigation.But on their Twitter feeds, some women said the investigation seemed to stall and it was not until the allegations became public that Defy Media took action.In a statement on Twitter on Oct. 8, Defy Media confirmed Mr. Signore’s termination, saying that new information had become available and the “scope and magnitude of his inappropriate actions became apparent.”In a statement through his lawyer, Yana Henriks, Mr. Signore denied any allegations of sexual assault, harassment or retaliation. He said that Defy Media used the allegations made against him as an opportunity to deprive him of his ownership stake in the company.Social media helps retain and spread what Ms. Graves, of the National Women’s Law Center, calls “institutional memory.” A written story is easier to pass along than a spoken one, even if the original teller is anonymous, based in another office or leaves the company, she said.The invitation-only Facebook group Tech Ladies provides information on job openings and invitations to networking events. But it also has a discussion called #HelpASisterOut where members can solicit advice about how to come forward with a harassment complaint or to ask about a company’s reputation or culture.“What we’ll see is someone post that they are applying for a job at a company and ask if anyone has any good or bad stories about it,” said Allison Esposito, the founder of Tech Ladies. “If it was great, you’ll see that in the comments. But if it wasn’t, people will say ‘DM me’ or ‘let’s take it to the phone,’ to share the information.”An app called Blind allows all employees from more than 100 companies, including Google, Facebook, Amazon and Airbnb, to sign up through their work email but then chat anonymously about office and industry issues.But in the past year, Blind has also become a hotbed for frank talk about sexual harassment.When Susan Fowler, a former engineer at Uber, claimed on her personal blog in February that her sexual harassment accusations against a direct supervisor were ignored by the company’s human resources department, Uber employees logged in to Blind more than 10 times on average each day — spending more than 3.5 hours — to discuss the scandal.Outlets now abound for women — especially younger, newer employees — who might be left out of tightly guarded cliques of trust at work.In private Facebook groups, women in the comedy profession share a list of men who have been banned from various venues across the country for inappropriate sexual behavior.BetterBrave, an online guide to resources for sexual harassment victims in the workplace, has had more than 30,000 visits since being started this summer by three female friends in the tech industry. SheWorx, an advocacy group for female entrepreneurs, hosts an online survey asking for anonymous submissions of experiences related to gender-based bias and harassment, “from egregious incidents to the small paper cuts and micro-aggressions experienced every day.”The anonymity attached to some allegations has spurred debate. A Google spreadsheet that named dozens of men in the media world, identifying individuals with descriptions ranging from leering to sexual harassment to assault, drew a mixed reaction when it was publicized in October.Some applauded the public outing of the men who were accused. But others were outraged that the document had been widely disseminated, that the allegations had been made anonymously and the accused given no opportunity to defend or remove themselves from the list.For Amanda Aiken, the whisper network worked. Sort of.Ms. Aiken was a new paralegal at a small Canadian real estate investment firm when, during a company event in 2011, a top executive repeatedly tried to cajole her into going back to his home.“His entire body was touching mine — I would try to get away from him, physically move away, and he would try to follow me,” she recalled in an interview.In the following days, she learned that several other female colleagues had similar stories, including her friend, Erin Carson. After word filtered up to management, the women were soon summoned to a meeting with one of the company’s owners to discuss their allegations.“There was some anger, there were some tears,” Ms. Carson, a receptionist at the firm in Victoria, B.C., said in an interview. “But it was kind of reassuring to know we weren’t alone.”The executive left the company soon afterward. Ms. Aiken quit her job, citing a lingering feeling of awkwardness.“Too many women have commented about how they just gave up because men didn’t listen when we said no and we felt powerless,” she said. “I want to get my power back.”
