WASHINGTON — The last time — perhaps the only time — John R. Bolton inspired bipartisan agreement, it was over the shared conclusion that he was perhaps the least diplomatic personality a president could have ever picked to be an American diplomat.That was in 2005, when Mr. Bolton was last considered for a government job. Accounts of his red-faced tirades against intelligence analysts whose findings he disagreed with so concerned members of the Senate that they refused to approve his nomination as President George W. Bush’s ambassador to the United Nations.He wound up getting the job anyway through a recess appointment by Mr. Bush, who later regretted spending the political capital on such a divisive figure, telling conservatives, “I don’t consider Bolton credible.”Thirteen years later, another president has given Mr. Bolton the far more consequential job of national security adviser. But because that post does not require Senate confirmation, the five months in 2005 that the Senate took to decide whether Mr. Bolton should go to the United Nations remain the only extensive examination of his record and his temperament.Those who opposed him then, like Carl W. Ford Jr., along with many who supported him, say Mr. Bolton has not changed.In an appearance before a Senate committee vetting Mr. Bolton’s nomination in 2005, Mr. Ford, a former assistant secretary of state for intelligence and research in the Bush administration, summed up Mr. Bolton, then an under secretary of state for arms control and international security, as a “kiss-up, kick-down sort of guy.”“I believed then, as I believe now, he lacks any of the qualities to be a senior government official,” Mr. Ford said last week. “It has been my experience that his mouth is much bigger than his brain.”The confirmation battle took place during the first years of the Iraq war, a conflict Mr. Bolton supported and defends to this day. In the run-up to the war, he was a key proponent of the administration’s argument for the invasion: that the president of Iraq, Saddam Hussein, possessed weapons of mass destruction that threatened the United States.“We are confident that Saddam Hussein has hidden weapons of mass destruction and production facilities in Iraq,” Mr. Bolton said in 2002. The claim was later shown to be false and based on flawed or selective intelligence.Amid the emotions that the war by then engendered, consideration of Mr. Bolton’s nomination turned into a five-month standoff as Senate Democrats scrutinized what they saw as Mr. Bolton’s efforts to subvert the government’s own findings in pursuit of his and his allies’ beliefs.The release of thousands of pages of documents revealed Mr. Bolton, an ally of Vice President Dick Cheney, to be a volatile, aggressive infighter, who seemed willing to cherry-pick intelligence, steamroll analysts he did not agree with and end-run his State Department bosses in pursuit of an agenda considered bellicose even among Bush administration hawks. He shared that penchant with Mr. Cheney, who repeatedly confronted intelligence professionals and agencies whose analytical assessments did not support his conclusions in favor of the Iraq war.“A lot of officials in Washington behave badly, so that, sadly enough, was unlikely to be disqualifying,” said Antony J. Blinken, the committee’s Democratic staff director. But in examining reasons for Mr. Bolton’s behavior, “That’s when threads started emerging, and when we pulled on them, we started to find things that were truly disturbing, including to Republican members of the committee.”But not all Republicans, according to Dan Diller, who was deputy staff director for the committee majority.“There was some validity” to accusations of Mr. Bolton’s behavior during the investigation, Mr. Diller wrote in an email, but it “found no clear ethical transgressions. He was an aggressive, sharp-elbowed bureaucratic operator who always tried to get his way, but would relent in the end rather than engaging in insubordination.”When Mr. Bush nominated Mr. Bolton for the United Nations job in March 2005, Condoleezza Rice, then the secretary of state, praised him as a “tough-minded diplomat” with a successful track record as an under secretary for arms control and an assistant secretary of state for international organizations.It later emerged that Ms. Rice and other top diplomats were keen to ship Mr. Bolton off to New York, comfortably away from his portfolio at the State Department. Ms. Rice, now teaching at Stanford, declined to comment for this article.At the opening of Mr. Bolton’s confirmation hearing before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee about a month after he was nominated, the committee chairman, Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, a Republican, tried for a balanced assessment.“Opponents of Mr. Bolton have criticized some statements of the nominee as abrasive, confrontational and insensitive,” Mr. Lugar said. “Some of these same statements have been celebrated by supporters of the nominee as demonstrating a tough-minded, refreshingly blunt approach to diplomacy.”Testifying before the committee, Mr. Bolton presented himself as a reformer who would go to the United Nations and help “build institutions that serve as the cornerstone of freedom in nascent democracies,” curb the proliferation of nuclear weapons and support a global war on terror promised by the Bush administration.He also sought to explain his comment — famous even by then — that if the top 10 stories of the 38-story United Nations Secretariat building were lopped off, “it wouldn’t make a bit of difference” by asserting that it “was a way of saying there’s not a bureaucracy in the world that can’t be made leaner and more efficient.”Mr. Bolton’s public statements, it turned out, were the least of his problems.Over seven hours on that first day, Democrats explored allegations by intelligence officials that Mr. Bolton had gone after two analysts who disagreed with his views on Cuba’s biological weapons capability.Mr. Bolton was preparing for a speech in which he would accuse a range of nations, including Libya, Iran, Iraq, North Korea and Syria, of possessing chemical and biological weapons when he sought clearance from the intelligence officials for an assertion he wanted to make that Cuba was developing a biological weapons program, a claim that was not, in fact, fully supported by American intelligence.Christian Westermann, a State Department intelligence analyst specializing in biological and chemical weapons, and an unnamed national intelligence official responsible for Latin America disagreed with the claims about Cuba that Mr. Bolton sought to make.Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, told the committee that “trying to remove someone as an analyst from their job because you disagree with what they’re saying, I think, is dreadfully wrong.”Mr. Bolton responded that he had targeted the two officers for reassignment, not for firing, because “If I may say so, their conduct was unprofessional and broke my confidence and trust.”The next day, Mr. Ford, who had run the bureau where Mr. Westermann worked, rattled the committee by describing Mr. Bolton as a “serial abuser” of lower-level staffers.“There are a lot of screamers that work in government,” Mr. Ford said. “But you don’t pull somebody so low down the bureaucracy that they are completely defenseless. It’s an 800-pound gorilla devouring a banana.”Reflecting on the hearing in an interview this week, Mr. Dodd called Mr. Ford’s testimony “a galvanizing moment.”During the week after Mr. Ford’s appearance, more testimony emerged about Mr. Bolton’s efforts to tailor, suppress or selectively use intelligence as well as intimidate intelligence analysts and other professionals who disagreed with the views held by him or Mr. Cheney and his allies.Rexon Ryu, a former State Department official, told the panel he encountered Mr. Bolton’s ire after he neglected to forward a cable related to United Nations weapons inspections in Iraq. Mr. Bolton then tried to block Mr. Ryu’s appointment as a liaison on nonproliferation issues. Mr. Ryu was transferred elsewhere at the State Department, and then recently joined the staff of Senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska, a committee Republican.The unnamed national intelligence officer for Latin America was revealed to be Fulton Armstrong, who in an interview last week said that Mr. Bolton had targeted him for “vicious attacks,” “rumor campaigns” and “infantile” character assassination.It also emerged that Mr. Bolton had prevented Ms. Rice and her predecessor, Colin Powell, from seeing some State Department findings crucial to drafting policy on Iran, and had kept Ms. Rice out of the loop as he worked to replace Mohamed ElBaradei, the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, seen by Mr. Bolton and his administration faction as too soft on Iran.There was more.The panel also learned that Mr. Bolton had bullied intelligence analysts who made more conservative assessments of Syria’s illicit weapons programs in the run-up to a 2003 speech and had requested classified intercepts from the National Security Agency, including the names of American companies and officials, raising concerns that he was seeking information about ideological opponents.At an emotional committee meeting barely more than a week after the first hearing, two Democrats — Mr. Dodd and Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware — demanded three additional weeks to investigate the charges against Mr. Bolton and seek documents from the White House.Mr. Lugar accused Democrats of stalling and pushed for the committee to vote. But visibly shaken, Senator George Voinovich, Republican of Ohio, said he had heard enough to understand that Mr. Bolton was an ideologue who “fosters an atmosphere of intimidation.” Anyone who behaves in such a way, he concluded, should not be “the face of the United States to the world.”On May 12, 2005, with Mr. Voinovich still unconvinced, the committee lacked the support to recommend Mr. Bolton’s nomination to the full Senate. Instead, they voted along party lines to forward the nomination for a Senate vote “without recommendation,” a relatively rare move.Mr. Bolton’s fate was sealed.Twice, Republicans failed to garner enough votes to break a Democratic filibuster and proceed to a full vote. Before the second attempt, the White House offered to release information related to Mr. Bolton’s Syria speech, but not the list of names from National Security Agency intercepts that Mr. Bolton had sought. Democrats rejected the offer, and in August, Mr. Bush ended up making Mr. Bolton an ambassador in a recess appointment, denouncing what he said were “partisan delaying tactics.”Control of Congress returned to the Democrats the next year, virtually guaranteeing that Mr. Bolton’s time at the United Nations would be short. He left in late 2006. By that time, Mr. Voinovich, who died in 2016, had changed his view of Mr. Bolton.“While Bolton is not perfect,” he wrote, “he has demonstrated his ability, especially in recent months, to work with others and follow the president’s lead by working multilaterally.”Mr. Hagel, who voted in support of Mr. Bolton in 2005 and later became secretary of defense in the Obama administration, also changed his assessment.“The president and America needs a wise, steady and thoughtful national security advisor,” Mr. Hagel wrote in an email last week. “John Bolton is not that person.”
